 Okay. So, query processing, we've been talking about query processing for the last couple of two, three classes. What we kind of saw was that there are many ways to implement the relational operators, right? For instance, for joins, we saw three, four different ways of doing it. For selections, we saw a few different ways of doing it. Aggregates, a few different ways of doing it, and so on. And in practice, especially when you talk about really large-scale databases, what we often call data warehouses, you see even more techniques being used, okay? Because they really need to scale. They really need to do queries as fast as possible. And funnily enough, despite 50 years of research, you still see the biggest vendors spending a ton of effort on this, okay? If you look at job postings for, or you look at the work that's going on in companies like Snowflake, Amazon Redshift, Oracle, and so on, they still work on these things, right? There are still issues that they care about. SQL is very complex. So we've talked about just the basic operators, right? There's like a ton of other operators that we need to worry about. There are these window functions, ranking functions, and so on. And all of that often requires its own operators. Ranking, for instance, can be done much more efficiently than the naive way of doing it. Like the naive way of doing ranking is to sort. But if my goal is to only find the top five scores, let's say, I should be able to do better. And there is ton of work on that. One of the things that query of processors have done really well is made this very modular, right? You can add in new operators as long as they follow the contract. In most cases, that contract is iterative model. Open, close, next model. But there are variations. As long as you follow that contract, you can kind of plug in new operators easily. Not easily is a relatively speaking, but you can plug in new operators. It's not like, does not require rewriting tons of work. You can sort of just add in new operators. Like 20-ish years ago, or maybe even slightly, about 25-ish years ago, when I worked with PostgreSQL code base, we didn't, like, none of that made it into production. But for our research prototypes, when we were adding some operators to PostgreSQL, once we got the first one done, adding new operators was like, we knew exactly which files needed to be edited. Getting the query optimizer to use our operator was a different challenge. But just getting a query, getting an operator in place was not that difficult for PostgreSQL. Because it's very nicely modular, and all you have to care about is the inputs and, like, follow the exact format for input, follow the exact format for output, and you are good. And if we were to do a join operator, we could sort of copy the existing join operator code and then modify that. It's relatively easy to add in new operators. Okay. Getting, as I said, getting the optimizer to use it is a little bit of a different challenge because optimizer has to reason about which operators can fit together and how to execute the overall query. Okay. So that's what we'll kind of talk about sort of today and next class. So the topic for us, next topic for us is query optimization. We'll start with talking about why query optimization is important. We'll discuss some of the key steps and start with some high-level concepts. So remind you, this is where the query optimizer fits in the flow. The query comes in. The query parser checks for all the syntactic stuff and converts it into some sort of an internal representation, which often looks like a relational algebra-like representation, like a query plan, basically, but not annotated, a logical query plan. And then the query optimizer takes that logical query plan and creates a physical plan out of it. Okay. And we have seen examples of logical and physical plans. And the query optimizer's job is to find the best way to evaluate it. Okay. So, you know, how much does it matter? So let's look at some demo. Our university database is really not large enough, so I tried to use Stack Exchange that you're familiar with, but even Stack Exchange is actually not large enough to see the differences. So let's try a very simple query. Select star from posts where ID equal to, I think, 479 worked. Yeah. Hopefully you can read it. If you can't, let me know, because I'll use this for next sometime for a few different things. So you can see that for this query, the optimizer decided to use an index scan. Okay. So there exists an index on the posts table, on the primary key. So it's a posts primary key table. And this query is on the primary key. So it decided to use the index. And it gave us a time of 0.9 milliseconds. In fact, in this case, the planning time was more. Okay. The database is that the relations are so small, and I'm only fetching one tuple. So the planning time is really small. So I guess 479 didn't work. I can see that the optimizer was expecting one row, but I actually got zero rows. But if I were to do, I think it was 579, or was it 279? Nope. Maybe it was 579. Just trying to see if it makes a difference. Yeah. So 579 actually did have a hit. And you see that here, we did actually get one row out. And you can see that the planning time here was much lower, and the execution time here was slightly higher. And you want to guess why the planning time went down this drastically from 19 to 369, or 19 milliseconds to less than half a millisecond? Anyone know why that might be? I don't know why, but is it maybe because you did it already, so it's saved in cache or something? Yeah. So I did it already is the right one, but it's not about saving in cache, because here PostgreSQL doesn't save things like that. But it's just the CPU is, first time it ran it, the stuff might not be in the cache. Like not the PostgreSQL cache, but the operating system cache, like the hardware cache. And that could explain that difference. Oftentimes when I'm doing experiments like this, I should run these things like multiple times, because every time I'm going to get slightly different answers. So by now, I'm kind of getting some steady state numbers. So I see 171, 108, 104, 156. That seems like approximately close, close enough. Especially when I'm talking about milliseconds, those numbers are close enough. If it was in seconds, like if I saw 17 seconds versus 10 seconds, that's a huge difference. But milliseconds is a small time. Even for a computer, milliseconds is not that much. The planning time is still high. So this query is simple enough that it's actually taking me more time to plan, do the parsing and all of that, than to actually execute it. But yeah, that's what it is. What else do I want to say here? Now, PostgreSQL has a kind of a cool thing that you can use to... I can disable index scan. It was using index scan, so I'm just going to go ahead and disable that. Well, it turns out it found another scan to use. It really does not want to do just a scan, like a sequential scan. So it found another operator that, I guess, is not getting blocked by the index scan block. So it's called bitmap index scan. The execution time did go up. It's now 1.6. I'm not going to try to explain this operator. I'm not quite sure what it is. I know what bitmap indexes are, but I don't know what this specific operator does. Because there are no bitmap indexes in PostgreSQL to my knowledge. So it's some sort of an operator that's using index, existing index to do something. Either way, the execution time went up. Let's confirm that it actually went up. Seems like it went up a bit, but may not be as much as it initially seemed. Yeah. So may not be as much as it initially seemed, but maybe it does look like it went up slightly. The planning time also went up. But I didn't get what I wanted, which was to disable, force it to use, force it to use. So I think it's called bitmap scan. Now, I forced it to actually use a scan. So by scan, I mean I'm not using the B plus 3 index anymore. PostgreSQL has B plus 3 index, even though it didn't specify it. That's the index it has. Now, I'm forced to use a scan. The time now has actually gone up. So it's 68 milliseconds now. And let me try again. So the steady state time seems to be more like in the tens of milliseconds, around approximately 10 milliseconds. But that's still much higher than what it was before. So without this, the time was 0.1 milliseconds. Now with this, if I'm forcing it to use a sequential scan, my time is a factor of 100 more. So I went up from 0.1 milliseconds to 11 milliseconds. Obviously, it doesn't matter when I'm talking about a relation with 26,000 rows. But when I'm talking about a relation with tens of millions of rows, these numbers are going to be substantially larger. This is where optimizer matters. The optimizer has to choose between this plan, the bitmap plan, and the index plan. It has three different plans to work with. So it has to find out which is the best plan to use. And I don't have a secondary index on this from what I remember. One second. So create index on table name, column name. Okay. Let's go here. Create index. ABC. On posts. Let's say last editor user ID. Okay. Now, let's try the same query. But let's try it with from posts where last editor. Okay. I need to... Okay. In this case, it did go ahead and use the index that I added. Okay. Last editor user ID equal to 579. So it did... use that index. Okay. And it gave me a cost of 1.387. So sequential scan cost for me was in the order of tens of milliseconds. Even for a secondary index, I'm getting a cost of 1.387. But what if I had something like this, right? Let's say... PostgreSQL has a... I've got a way to do this. Still not too bad. It's still actually... It's still actually... Using a... Index scan. Okay. Disable this. Okay. So it's now just using plain index scan. And it's still working out pretty okay. I'm a little surprised. Okay. In this case, it went ahead and used a sequential scan. Because my query had a range. But this is still not doing what I want it to do. Hold on. Last try and then we'll move on. Between 10 and... 1000. I think that's how you specify ranges in Postgres. Okay. Yeah. So it's refusing to use the... So it's using an index. When I had a range from 10 to 100. But the moment I had a range from 10 to 1000, it refused to use an index. Okay. It decided to use a sequential scan instead. So these two are instructive to look at. I'm trying to see why I can't get this thing to... Show the full query. No. That's not working. There's probably a control down here. I can't get to. Anyway. And you can... You can kind of see this here also. So here, for instance, it expected 227 rows. Or rather, it estimated 224 rows. It retrieved 227 rows. And based on that, it calculated the cost to be whatever the cost was. Okay. Whereas here, it estimated 4700 rows. Or the other way around. It estimated 4766. It got 4771. And this number was large enough that it decided not to use the index scan. Okay. It said... Because remember, this is a secondary index, which means that I have to go here and there. It's more expensive to use a secondary index. And that's why it switched to using a sequential scan for this query. Okay. Make sense? Any questions on this? What we are looking at here? No. Bitmap is something different than a bit tree. I'm not 100% sure what that bitmap operator is. Okay. PosiglasQL back then at least did not have a bitmap operator like that. I think it's overloading the... It's sort of using the index scan in a different way. But I'm not sure what it is. This is a standard index. Whatever index that we did, we did. That's the standard index it's using. One natural question is that how did it come up with these numbers, right? 477. It's pretty accurate if you look at it. It estimated 4766. It got 4771. It estimated 224. It got 227. It's very accurate numbers. That's the last part of what query optimizer has to get right. The query optimizer has to... For instance, if I were to do this, it will likely not do a great job at this. Okay. So it's a weird predicate, right? I am doing last editor user ID percent 10 equal to 5. So I'm taking a mod of 10 to 5. And that's not a query that is a very normal query. PosiglasQL doesn't do a good job at it. You can see that it estimated 129 rows and it actually used... It had a thousand rows. That's going to throw off the optimization process. If it estimated 129, based on what we saw here, if it could use the index, it can't use the index for this query, but if it could have used the index, it would have chosen the secondary index because it thought the number of rows is 129. But the number of rows is actually 1032. It's much higher. This is the kind of thing that can throw off the optimization process a lot. And in fact, PosiglasQL and other optimizers, other database systems, they spend a lot of time trying to... trying to get these numbers to be accurate. Just the estimates to be accurate. But this is a weird query. This is not a common predicate. It has no way to estimate the cost of this predicate. It's guessing. In fact, I'm pretty sure it's guessing purely... It's a bit weird. It should have guessed... It should have just guessed one-tenth, but it didn't guess one-tenth. So this mod 10, it should have just guessed one-tenth. Because mod 10 can take 10 different values. Might as well assume all of them are equal. So it should have guessed one-tenth. One-tenth would have been... I think that's like 25,000 rows. So one-tenth would have been 2,500. But it didn't guess that. It has some other mechanism for guessing it. Yeah? Questions? What does the optimizer use to make these estimates? It has a... We'll talk about this in more detail. But it actually has a lot of statistics in it. It keeps track of the... For instance, simplest thing it can keep track of is the max and the min. And then it assumes that the values are distributed uniformly between max and the min. And then uses that to estimate. That's one way to do it. As I just said, for this predicate, for instance, the percent 10 is guaranteed to be between 0 and 9 or 1 and 10, depending on how you interpret percent. Percent is mod operation. So in that case, the best guess would have... Like a good guess would have been one-tenth of the value satisfied. But it didn't make that guess. But that's how the optimizer works. It makes some assumptions and it maintains some statistics and it combines the two to come up with these estimates. So let's look at another query that's a little bit more complex. A join query, which I tried here. Just trying these things while we were... While you guys were doing your exams. I'm using a new one because actually here also I probably should use a new one. Those properties that I said, those were set for the duration of the session. So now those are not set anymore. Okay. It's a bit more complex but the same principles. Right. So here, this plan is using hash joins throughout. So it has a hash join on posts and comments followed by another hash join to users. And the planning time was 8.5 milliseconds. Execution time was 187 milliseconds. And again, you can see all the same numbers that we saw. The number of rows. Number of rows. Number of rows. Rows here, 2500, 800, 2500. Doesn't seem to have any mistakes here at all. Does anyone want to try to guess why it made no mistakes? Like zero mistakes in the rows. So the estimated size, result size was 46,385. Actual was 46,385. No mistakes. Anyone? It does, but these estimates were prepared beforehand. Before it ever touched the data. Those estimates, the first part here, the estimated costs were done before it touched the data. So it was purely based on the statistics. So the reason for, go ahead. Right. So it has the, it has the accurate counts for the number of rows. For all the relations. Those counts are not approximate. Those are accurate. It knows precisely, at least because we, there's a fresh database and we have re-initialized the statistics at some point. Actually, I didn't, maybe just, I didn't actually re-initialize the, maybe the, the, the, the initializer file that I just ran a little while ago, maybe it has a vacuum analyze command. So you need to use the vacuum analyze. It doesn't seem to have that. You need to use the vacuum analyze command in order to get the statistics right. But in either case, it seems to have, it has a precise statistics and a number of rows. And in this particular case, the joints sort of didn't throw away anything. Sometimes a join between two relations might throw away some tuples, but these joints, because of the database is clean and because of that, none of the joints threw away anything. And that's why it got the precise numbers. If I were to, for instance, have even any predicate on it and what are some of the attributes of these relations? Let's say score. and score equal to 100. P dot score. Now we can see that there are some mistakes it's starting to make. So this is a down here we're looking at. It made mistakes here. It estimated two rows, but it only got zero rows, which is not particularly interesting. I could, what I could do is score less than 100. And now we can see some mistakes coming up. Still not big mistakes. It's still really good at getting these numbers right. So it has like barely any mistakes. mistakes. So I guess somehow okay, I'm trying to force it to do some mistakes, but it's not actually doing any mistakes. Yeah. Anyway, seems to be pretty accurate most of the time. 520 to 5492. Barely any mistakes. The main thing I wanted to show here was not that. So the thing that I wanted to focus on was actually the joins. So here it's using hash joins and we can see an execution time of about 100 milliseconds. So let's see what happens when we disable hash join. When I disable hash join, it switched to using sort of nested loops joins with index scans. So now same query but instead of using hash joins, we are using index joins. Remember that an index join is basically a nested loops join with an index in the inner loop. So this is an index join. Even though it says nested loops, that actually is an index join. So it's doing a scan on comments followed by using an index on posts and then the result is further used with an index on users. So it decided to use an index join for this case. The cost is higher. Now we are in 232 milliseconds. Assuming those numbers are accurate because I didn't rerun them, so I only have one instance here. I have 232 milliseconds. Whereas the one with the hash join was I believe 100 milliseconds. index scan equal to false. What do you think we are going to see now? Anyone? No hash joins, no index joins? There is merge join in between. Because these relations are large enough that it's going to use a merge join first. If the relations were small it could switch to a nested loop but it's going to be very unhappy to switch to a nested loop. Nested loops is going to be pretty bad. This plan is a lot more complicated than I would have expected but I guess it is what it is. Note that the cost is not too bad. It's 109 milliseconds. So it's not actually too bad. I don't know why I decided to not use it. If I look up here the total cost here was 1209. So it was 12,000 total cost. Whereas the total cost for index was so total cost for hash join it estimated between 2 and 4,000. Total cost for what did it do where the index one went? Looks like I don't have the index one here. So according to its estimates the hash join was going to cost between 2 and 4,000 units. The index join, sorry the sort merge join based algorithm was 12,000 and I don't have the index one. so the index one was actually on the if it picked an in-between number it was around 5,000. So that's why I picked this one before it picked the sort merge join. So let's go ahead and disable both of them again. I'm going to disable this and I'm going to disable sort merge enable merge join. Okay. Disable merge join. Time is still not too bad. We are still in 135 milliseconds. Although its estimated cost has gone up quite a bit. It's in the range from 1,000 to 75,000 but the actual execution time is still pretty low. So still not too bad. Somehow despite me forcing it to use forcing it to use nested loops join. Ah, finally. Now it is actually using nested loops join. And this hopefully shows you why, what all the things that Optimizer is doing and why it's so important in some ways. Now we are in 18 second, 19 second range. Much worse than what we had so far. We were in 100 millisecond range, now we are in 19 second range. A factor of almost 100 or more. more. The hints are there by the way for you to tune if the Optimizer is behaving, if it's not behaving well. It's going to be hard for me to force the Optimizer not to behave well, but like I did try with that percent one, I know that these optimizers don't do well with those mod operations, but still generally speaking it's kind of hard to make this do badly. I need larger datasets, the TPCH, that other database there called TPCH, that one I can probably make it do bad things. The numbers are still accurate, its row estimates are still accurate, but the costs are much higher now because of the nested loops join. Another thing you will notice here is these numbers. these are not seconds, it's not estimating seconds, it's some internal metric, internal number that it has, internal cost measure that it has. It doesn't directly translate into seconds, but it's used for relative comparisons, so it's using it to compare one plan against the other, and that's why it's just like a number, you just treat it as a number. You can't interpret it as seconds because that depends on the computing hardware which PostgreSQL doesn't really look at the same, it doesn't include that when it's computing the costs. The cost for this query under the same database will be the same in different configurations, different computers. These numbers will be the same, these numbers will be different because these are the actual types. things. Any questions on what we did here? Again, my goal here was twofold. One is to show a few different plans really sort of live, and secondly emphasize why this problem is so important. I did my PhD on this topic. There are people who did their PhD 20 years before me. There are people who are doing their PhD today on query optimization. So, we don't have a, like I'll just cover a few more slides and then we'll stop. So, we kind of saw this type of an example. Again, why? Many different ways of executing a query. We saw examples. A simple query like a selection, if I do a sequential scan on it, that could take seconds. even for a one gigabyte size relation, which is not particularly large. But if I had an index, that would be in milliseconds. And we did see examples of queries where the difference between a scan and an index was a factor of 100 or more. Not very uncommon to see that. There are many choices whether to use indexes or not, what join method to use, what join order to use. We didn't see an example of this. It's a little hard to show that, but given a joint query, I do have a choice of doing R and S first or S and T first. So that choice also has to be made by the query optimizer. This is an optimization problem. There are many, computer science is obviously full of optimization problems of all kinds. This is a combinatorial problem, so it's kind of in the same vein as a traveling salesman problem, if you have seen that before. There are exponentially or actually permutation large space here. If I have n relation, the number of plans is n factorial or more. So it's a very large number of possible plans that I can use. Here I was just using a three-way join query. In practice it's not uncommon to see five to ten-way join queries and in bigger databases you actually see join queries with 50 or 100 relations. So the number of choices can be extremely large. And so what we are going to do is going to talk about the different steps in here one by one. How do you decide that two plans are identical? And how do you decide that how do you find the cost for a plan and then how do you actually search and find the best plan? So those are the things we are going to talk about moving forward. The goal of the query optimizer is to get a reasonably good plan. We really don't try to find the best plan. Best plan is not well-defined because PostgreSQL or optimizers are working with estimates so they really can't get to best anyway but they can try to get to really good ones. In many ways people often cast query optimization problem as avoiding the bad plans problem. We don't necessarily want the best plan. We just want to avoid that 20-second plan when there existed a 10-millisecond plan. So avoid the really really bad plans. That's kind of the goal. And our goal is an annotated plan. So we not only need the order in which to do the operations but we also need the specific algorithms to use. And more than that we also need some parameters for the algorithms. Like a hash join does have parameters. There is a hash function, sort join. we saw a long big plan for sort join. I guess in PostgreSQL the sort merge join is a complicated operation. So it looks like there is a bunch of parameters there. So all of that has to be decided by the query optimizer. So conceptually at a very high level the goal of query optimizer is to generate all possible execution plans, figure out the cost for each of them and then choose the best. We are not actually going to do this because this will be not feasible. The all possible execution plan is an extremely large space of plans, too many plans. So we are going to short circuit this and try to directly come up with the plan somehow. So let me do a last slide and then we'll stop here. Actually let's skip this. So what we'll do in the next class is we'll start with discussing how do we generate all possible execution plan for a query and hopefully we can cover that and we can cover this part. We might not be able to cover this part but we should be able to cover these two parts. How do you estimate those numbers that we saw and how do we talk about equivalence of query plans? Like for instance we look at these two query plans, these are for the same query but how do we know for sure that they are the same plans. They execute the same way. For instance, this plan does the selection after the join, this plan does the selection before the join. Are these identical results or not? And this does not have an obvious answer. I don't know if I want to give someone one minute to tell me why this question does not have an obvious answer. Like this step that I did, take this sigma from here and push it down to the instructor, doesn't always work. It worked in this case but it doesn't always work. So for instance, if this were an outer join, that doesn't work. If it's an outer join, then I cannot arbitrarily take this selection and push it down to instructor. Because the meaning of the outer join actually changes. We saw one example of this in one of the assignments where we had the selection predicate inside the on and outside the on. If any of you remember that one, that's what this corresponds to. And for outer joins, I cannot arbitrarily push this down. So that's the kind of thing that we need to discuss when we see as a starting step just to figure out whether two plans are equivalent or not. But if they're not equivalent, I can't use this plan in place of that plan. So let's stop here. We'll pick up from here in the next class and then continue from that point.