 So once again, query optimizer, so this is sort of showing what the place of query optimizer is in a overall query processing flow. When a user query comes in, first the query parser takes over and parses the query, makes sure that all the syntax is accurate and all of that stuff. And then query optimizer is responsible for constructing the execution plan. So the goal of the query optimizer is something like this. A query evaluation plan which lists out all the operators that should be executed and the parameters of the operators. So we saw several examples when we looked at pgadmin a couple of classes ago. So when we saw pgadmin, which one is this? Badges, natural join, posts, let's say. And if we do explain, this is the output of the query optimizer. The query optimizer is producing the query plan that should be executed in response to this query. It includes the specific operator instantiations. It includes the order in which the join should be done and the order in which the operator should be done. All of those things are query optimizer's responsibility. And on top of it, the things you don't see here are, there are parameters to these things. So some parameters here also need to be set. So this doesn't have, let me see if it shows more parameters after I analyze. So these parameters like hash buckets, memory required, all of those things. So you can see here, things like hash buckets and things like this also need to be set by the query optimizer. Or they are, either they are part of the code base itself or they are set by the query optimizer. It kind of depends on, each one of them will be different from each other. But these are all the things, along with the plan, the parameters of the operators, if needed, would also be set by the query optimizer. Any questions on this, by the way, what we are doing and why we are doing it? And we talked about the importance of query optimizer last time when we went through several example queries and saw the differences in the query execution cost for different queries. So that is kind of motivating the query optimizer. Today and Thursday, we'll discuss how query optimizers are built at a high level. So the first thing that we are going to talk about is what is called equivalence of expressions. How do you tell that two expressions, two separate query plans are identical? For instance, here is an example. This query plan has the selection happening here, whereas this query plan has the selection happening here. So the selection is happening before the join. Are these two query plans the same query plans? In some ways, this query plan is the one that is given to us by the parser. Now the query optimizer needs to decide if this is an acceptable query plan. Now the meaning of the query cannot change between here and here because that would be really problematic. If the query meant, like query returned different results here and different results here, that's not acceptable. So that's what equivalent means. Equivalent means that the results of the queries, result of this query plan and this query plan are identical. Now this we will reason at the level of logical operators. We don't need to look at physical operators here. This is logical operators. So based on the operators themselves, the joins, the projections, selections, based purely on that, we are going to decide if these two are equivalent plans or not. The query optimizer will use this sort of information about what plans are equivalent to generate alternate plans and then it can pick the best among those. That's why equivalence rules are super important. So two relational expressions are equivalent if the result is identical on all legal databases. This is again important because the equivalence is on all possible databases, not just the single database that we have. And then an equivalence rule is a rule that kind of allows us to go from one expression to another expression. So here are some very simple examples. Two very simple examples. The first example is we have a conjunction here. So we have a selection. So I didn't have enough time to change a lot of the slides, so I figured I'll use one of these things here. Is this B or A? This is B. And let's see if that works. Oh, that didn't work. Oh, dark camera. Okay. Oh, okay. So the predicate that we had was something like this, sigma, let's say A equal to 20 and B equal to 30 R. So that's the kind of predicate that we had to begin with. And the equivalence rule simply says that this is equivalent to sigma A equal to 20, sigma B equal to 30 of R. So all it's doing is splitting the two predicates into two and applying them, instead of applying them at once to every two-palm, we're applying it once followed by a second time. And you might ask, why do I care about this? Does someone want to tell me why this particular equivalence might be useful to the query optimizer? Why would it help it to separate the two out? From a query optimization purposes. The answer is somewhat, you might be overthinking it. It's a relatively sort of straightforward answer in this case. But anyone want to take a stab? Would you have to do a join to do the first one? No, you won't do a join. So the way the first one would get executed if it were actual query plan would be I would take a two-palm and sort of apply both of them one after the other inside. So this is like applying, having two separate operators or a single operator. But it doesn't require a join. Something a little bit simpler than that. So you might have an index on B, a primary index on B. As it stands, this predicate cannot be applied to an index because the index is only on B. Whereas this one can be applied to an index. It's a relatively simple thing, but that switch, the fact that I can separate those two out, allows me to consider the possibility that this operation can be done by using an index. So this one is simple. It's not necessarily that. What about this one? Instead of and, I have an or. Would this still work? Answer is no. Because the semantics of this is that only tuples that satisfy both the conditions will come out. Whereas the semantics of that is only one of them needs to be satisfied. So the first one is, will return more tuples than this. So these two are non-equivalent. Okay. And someone tell me what an equivalent rule to this might be. It may or may not make sense. But there is an equivalence rule for this. Or equivalent to. Okay. It's not particularly useful. Would you do like a union? So like on each individual or each. Right. Right. Again. So this, I'm not quite sure this is a rule that optimizers will care about. But. Now, this is a really interesting one. I'm sort of doing this on the fly. So I hadn't thought about this before. Under relational algebra, this rule is fine. Okay. In relational algebra, everything is a set. I'm not quite sure this rule works in SQL. And here is the reason for it. Or actually, I'm not sure. Okay. I'm not saying it doesn't work. But I'm not 100% sure the rule works in SQL. In SQL, first of all, we will not remove duplicates. So if R has duplicates, we need to make sure they are removed. They are not removed. So you will need to be sort of duplicate aware union, which is fine. It's a union all. That in itself is fine. But the problem with this union all now is if I do have a tuple that satisfies both the conditions, a single tuple that satisfies both the conditions, that will appear here twice. Once here and once here. And union all semantics are that you add them up. So I'll get two copies of a tuple that satisfies both conditions. Whereas here, only one tuple will arise. Here I'll have two tuples. And if I remove all, I have a problem that the semantics are not identical. So in SQL, I'm not sure this equivalence rule works. But in relational algebra, it works because in relational algebra, I'm always dealing with sets. This, by the way, is a kind of reasoning that for simple queries, I would expect you to be able to do for our standard operators. Okay. In class, we'll cover a few of these cases. But, you know, the expectation is that you can reason through some of these in sort of exams and homeworks and stuff. So you will see examples in homework as well. The other example here is that... I hope the folks over there can see that. I don't really have a... When I used to do this in the past, I had two big screens, which is easier. But right now for some of you to... For some of you to see this might be difficult. So if you want to move towards the center, that might not be a bad idea. Selections are commutative. So the order in which you apply the selections doesn't matter. So if I have theta 1, theta 2, and theta 2, theta 1, that is perfectly okay. Projections... If I have project operations... Note that I'm doing this in relational algebra. And this is the reason... Today you will find relational algebra most widely commonly used in papers or descriptions like this. Because they are more compact. I could write this out as SQL. But it will get pretty... Like, you know, long SQL. Relational algebra is much more compact. If I have a sequence of projections... Like L1, L2, LN... Only the last one matters. So this is equivalent to doing L1 directly on E. As long as L1 applies to E. So there is an implicit condition here... That this is a valid expression. Like it's possible that L1 refers to things generated by L2... In which case this will not be valid. These are all the rules, by the way, that exist in a query optimizer... To convert plans from one to another. Along with all the preconditions. Another one is that... The join... Sort of the order doesn't matter... Because this join is a... A symmetric operation. So whether I'm doing E1 join E2 or E2 join E1 doesn't matter. The last one... I can use a little bit of explanation. So the last one is saying... That... Sigma... Theta 0... E1... Join... Theta... E2... Is equivalent to... Sigma... Theta 0... E1... This is an important one because... This... This is called pushing down selection. So... Diagrammetically you can also show it like this. So... We have a... Sigma... Theta 0... Join... E1... E2... That gets transferred to... Sigma... Theta 0... E1... E2... Okay... So what's happening here is that... We have taken this selection... We have kind of pushed it down. But that's only allowed... If... Theta 0... Only applies... To... E1... That theta 0 is not referring to E2. If theta 0 is referring to E2 then I cannot do this. But if theta 0 only refers to attributes of E1... Then I can do that. Okay... So for instance... This might be... E1 might be... R... A... B... E2... Might be... R... S... B... C... And if... Theta 0 is equal to... A equal to 10... Then I can do that. Because... A equal to 10... Then I can do that. Because... A equal to 10... Only refers to R... And so I can... I can push it down. Okay... So this is called pushing down selection. And that's a very important... Equivalence expression. Because... It allows me to... Reduce... The input... To the join. Or anything else that follows. So by pushing down the selection... I can reduce the size of the input to the join. Which makes... Which can make my... Job easier. Okay... So... A equal to 10... A equal to 10... There is one situation... Under which... This particular optimization... Is not... A good idea. Okay... Anyone want to think about... Why that might be? Okay... Like... Why would I not always do this? Because the... Reason to do this... Is that the input to... Theta... This join... Is smaller now. Originally... It was going to do it... Between E1 and E2... Now it has to do it... Between E2... And the smaller relation. So it feels like... That should always be a good idea. Okay... But there is one reason... One place where... Or one scenario... Where this is not a good idea. Okay... And I can make this a little bit simpler. That situation shows up... In... Something like this. Is... R... Versus... Under what situation... Might that plan... Actually be better than this plan. And let's say... The join is on B. Anyone? Um... The benefit is not... Any rows in R. Not that many rows in R. The benefit will be reduced... But it's not necessarily going to be... Uh... Worse. Okay... So if R is a small relation... There isn't a lot of benefit to doing this... But it wouldn't really reduce the... It will not make this plan worse than that plan. Okay... Okay... So if R is a small relation... Like this plan... Could potentially be significantly worse than that plan. Okay... Okay... So if R is a small relation... There isn't a lot of benefit to doing this... But it wouldn't really reduce the... It would not make this plan worse than that plan. Okay... The difference here could be substantial. Like this plan could potentially be significantly worse than that plan. The difference here could be substantial, like this plan could potentially be significantly worse than that plan. Go ahead. If there are less, where A equals 10 in R and then there is S. I don't think so. But think it through, maybe there is a path to get from there to the solution. Anyone else? So I'll give you another hint. In a situation where this might occur when let's say size of S is equal to 1, for instance. Basically, this will apply generally if S is small. Like, relatively small. After the join, you select way less rows because you get rid of a lot of the R rows if S is 1. Then if there is a match, then you only have one row to check, select A equals 10. But actually doesn't make this plan worse than that plan. Cool. Oh, you're right. Anyone else? Should I give the answer? Is it like, is it like, easier to do the hash prior to like filtering it? Not particularly. If I'm using a hash line for this, then, first of all, typically I would build it on the right side, but let's say we are building on this side, smaller number of tuples is a little bit better. I mean, there is, more modern databases might have issues with it, but in our simpler databases, it's not an issue. The most high-performance databases will care about things like that because of the way they store the tuples and whatever, getting into more advanced topics. But for our setting, no. The answer is actually simpler. It's that if you had an index on R on B, okay, and let's say R is really large, okay, but there is an index on B, which means that the best join here is actually an index join. So I take the tuple of S, there's a single tuple of S, and I look up the index. That's going to be much faster than scanning R to apply the predicate. Because R is much larger in this example, so R, let's say, is a million. The best plan in this setting is going to be the index join on S joining into R. So you take the tuple from S, look up into the index, and then whatever results come out, you check the predicate. That's going to be much cheaper than trying to do something like this, because this forces us into some sort of a hash join or something like that, and that's going to be more expensive. So this is one situation when there is an index on R, it's a situation where you don't automatically want to push down. There is also a reason why this is a heuristic. Some query optimizers will essentially force all the predicates down to the relations, and this is an example of why that's a bad idea. Okay, that you shouldn't always do it, you should do it based on the cost. So this is a pictorial representation of the same rules that we saw. Some other equivalence rules are things like set union intersection are commutative and associative. So we can arbitrarily reorder them to some extent. Set difference is not commutative. Yeah, set difference is not commutative. So even minus e2 is not same as e2 minus even. So we can expect that. Outer joints are more complicated. So this same thing that I just saw here. Where did I go? The same example that I saw here of pushing down selection, this doesn't work if this is an outer joint. The semantics of outer joints are complicated. Okay. So because, for instance, if I had a, if I'm looking at an example, I'll just do a full outer joint. So this is not equivalent, and this is a full outer joint. This is not equivalent to doing a full outer joint on, on a equal to 10 r s. Okay. These two are not equivalent. The result of this, and the result of this could be very different because of the outer joints. In particular because of the left, because of the right outer joint. The left outer joint is okay, the right outer joint will be problematic. And the reason for that is, in an outer joint, looking at the s to r side, for an s tuple, I'm checking whether there is a match in r, and if there is a match, I move it up. Okay. So for instance, I could have a tuple in s, which is, so remember s is, so let's say r, I have 10 and 20, and s, I have 20 and 30. Okay. So this tuple in s does have a match in r, so when I do an outer joint, I'm only looking at this right outer joint part of it, when I do a match, I find the tuple, I find 10, 20, 30, and actually hold on, 11. Okay. So I do find a match, and then that match is rejected by the selection above. Okay. So, in this case, we end up with an output, which is null, 10, and then, because a is not equal to 10. But if I flip them, if I do this first, now the tuple does not get selected. So remember, in that case, this tuple does not appear in the output, because we found a match, but the match was rejected by the selection. In this case, from r, we remove that tuple first, so when s looks in there, s doesn't find anything, and so it goes ahead and outputs are null. Okay. So, in this case, we end up with an output, which is null, 20, 30. Okay. So we end up with an output, null, 20, 30, because of the order of them. So this pushing down the selection actually changed the meaning of the expression. And so I can't allow that. Okay. So this is not an acceptable transformation. So when you are pushing down selections, you have to be more careful with outer joints. Okay. And again, the left outer joint was not the problem here. The left part is actually fine. It's the right part that's the problem. Okay. Any questions? No. This is, by the way, often a question I have in the exams. Okay. Of this style of question, given two expressions, find an example that contradicts the equivalence. In this case, it's just not a problem. So, one of the things we are not doing systematically is we are not discussing how to prove equivalences. Okay. But you can prove that, you know, you can go through a reasoning step and show that if it were a left outer joint, that would not cause a problem. Okay. Only the right one caused. So basically what we are proving, you can prove that this is okay. So, this is okay. This is okay. Okay. This does not cause a problem because the interpretation here is that for a tuple in R, I look up in S and if I find a match, then I check whether A is 10. But it doesn't really, if I don't have a match, I still check if A is 10 or not. In this case, I simply remove those tuples first and then check in S. So, it doesn't really change the result in any way. You can kind of argue through that, that for a given tuple in R, the result does not change. So, you have to argue through that. Yeah. So, you would basically say that, if you have a given tuple in R, this does not cause a problem because the interpretation here is that for a tuple in R, I look up in S and if I find a match, then I check whether A is 10. But it doesn't really, if I don't have a match, I still check A is 10 or not. In this case, I simply remove those tuples first and then check in S. So, it doesn't really change the result in any way. You can kind of argue through that, that for a given tuple in R, the result does not change. So, you have to argue through that. Yeah. So, you would basically say that, consider an output tuple in here. You will have to prove that any output tuple that generated here is generated here and any output tuple that generated here is generated here. So, you can have to prove it both ways to prove the equivalence. But intuitively, you can also see that it should work out. But if you have to prove it, that's the way to systematically prove it. You need to take an output tuple here, show it will be generated here, take an output tuple generated by this, show it will be generated here. Or another way to do it is, take a tuple in R1 in R, S1 in S. There are multiple possibilities for these two tuples. Either they match and A is 10, they don't match A is 10, they match A is not 10, they don't match A is 10. And for all of those, you have to show that the output here in both cases will be the same. So, proving equivalence is a little bit more work than proving non-equivalence because the non-equivalence simply requires me to give a counter example. Whereas proving equivalence requires me to actually work through the scenarios. Any other questions here? Okay. Outageons are also not associative. You can do this much, this is okay. E1 full outer joint, E2 is same as E2 full outer joint, E1 left outer joint, E2 is same as E2 right outer joint, E1. Those are okay. Outageons are not associative though. I won't work through the examples here. But this kind of an equivalence which holds for natural joints does not hold for outer joints. For the same reasons, the nulls cause a problem. And there is an example here that you can look up. The slides are online, so you can take a look at them afterwards. The databases systems have a long list of such expressions. If you look in the book, and again, I don't want to cover a ton of them here, I just wanted to give you an idea of how they work and a few of them. But databases have a large number of such equivalences built into them to help them reason about query plan changes. Okay. For instance, one way to use this equivalent expression rules is you start with your original expression and you keep applying the rules. You keep applying the rules till you get new plans. Okay. For instance, you start with this plan and then you say, oh, I can move this sigma down. So that gives me one plan. Or I can reorder these two. Remember, joints are associative. So I can reorder them. That way I can generate more and more plans. Okay. And that's one way for me to effectively create a large number of equivalent expressions to my starting expression. The problem, of course, is that the number of equivalent expressions is very large. For instance, if I were to look at the canonical hardness in query optimization comes from a large number of joints. So if I have n joints, there is a large, and because joints are commutative, there is a large number of query plans that are possible. I could do R1, R2, followed by R3, followed by R4, or I could do R2, R3, followed by R5, followed by R1, and so on. There is a very large number of possibilities like this. So I cannot generate all the plans because there is too many plans. In fact, there is a, if you want to be precise, the number of plans is, looks something like this to this. At the worst case, the number of plans could be as large as n factorial times 2 to the power n. And in relational query for databases, n is often small, but there are enough cases that n is very large, like large. By large, I mean 10, 20. 10 factorial is a really large number. So even with just 10 relations, I'm talking about a very large number of query plans. So I certainly can't simply list out all plans one by one. That's too much work. But I'm going to have to do something smarter than that. And of course, don't forget, we still have to choose the join methods. So that's a separate issue that the query optimizers have to decide. And query optimizers also have to decide whether to use pipe learning and materialization. So on top of the equivalence part, there is a fair bit more work to be done that increases the number of possible plans that exist, increasing the work for the query optimizer. So, sort of comes to the first break point for us, which is the equivalence of expression. So far what we have talked about is, how do we reason about when two plans are equivalent? It's a very generic approach in some ways. This approach is very generic. It applies to any database system and many other planning problems. Other databases like MongoDB also have similar problems. You also need to figure out when query plans are equivalent. If you want to convert query plans into other query plans, or you want to optimize them, you will need to figure out how to discuss when query plans are equivalent. So that's kind of the first thing we talk about. The book has more detail. I'm not expecting you to memorize equivalence rules, but for some simple equivalence rules that I provide, I would expect you to be able to reason through them. Maybe come up with a counter example, or discuss why they should be equivalent, or something like that. Any questions? I'll try to release the homework for soon, within the next day or two, so that you can prepare for the fourth quiz. Which I believe is two weeks from Thursday. Yeah, two weeks from Thursday. Any questions so far? My plan was to only discuss this and this today, and then we'll do the last part next, the search part in the next class. So let's talk about estimating result sizes. Let me switch to the plan for a second here. So, I still have queries here, any of my original queries? What is that? I'm just trying to find any query that works. Okay, that worked. So, we've seen these query plans a few times already. The specific query doesn't matter right now. It's a three-way join between comments, posts, and users. The, and let me do the explain part first. Anyway, I hope all of you are comfortable with the difference between explain and analyze. Explain and explain, analyze. Who wants to quickly articulate that for me? What is the difference between running just explain and running explain analyze? Anyone? So, explain does not actually run the query. It only does the query optimization. And so, I only see all the estimated stuff. I see what the query optimizer decided where the expected result size is. Whereas explain and analyze will actually run the query and show us the comparisons. So, explain is useful just to look at what query optimizer plans to do or what query optimizer has decided to do. Explain and analyze helps you actually see how well it did its job. Okay. So, let's look at explain first. The, the thing that we are concerned about right now for this next part is where are these numbers coming from? Okay. Specifically these numbers. Okay. How did query optimizer decide that there are three, zero, five, five rows that satisfy the condition? Okay. And we can check whether the query optimizer was right here. So, you know, if we do select count star from posts, we see 25, 800. So, that's the total number of rows. And score less than 10 is exactly three, zero, five, five. So, it's exactly three, zero, five, five. So, there was no, PostgreSQL did not make any mistake in its estimate here. Okay. Okay. And we'll discuss why that is. But if you, but it's not always the case. For instance, let's do a query now. I can't actually see the, okay. Okay. So, I mentioned before that PostgreSQL doesn't handle these very well. Okay. So, you'll see that it estimated 129 rows. Let's see if that is true. But we have 1860 rows. Okay. So, PostgreSQL estimated that score percent 10 equal to five will have 129 rows. Whereas we have 1860 rows. Okay. So, it's estimate here is actually quite off. Okay. But the estimate for the other query was quite accurate. So, the question is, where is it coming up with these estimates? Okay. So, that's the question that we are answering right now. So, not this part, the cost part. The cost part is a separate issue. We are right now concerned only about this part here. Okay. So, the way of, there's a few slides here, but I'll try to jump through this quickly and we'll show some things in the database itself. Some of the things that we need to know in order to compute the cost of an operator, we need to know whether the relations are sorted. We need to know whether the database is the, what the primary key of the relation is. We need to know how many tuples, we need to know how many tuples match the predicate and all of these things. All of these things are needed to compute the cost of a specific operator. And in order to compute the cost of the overall query plan, PostgreSQL computes the cost of each of the operators and basically adds them up. Okay. Because the costs are more or less additive, so you can simply add them up. So, the question is, where do we get this information? Okay. Now, some of this information, like primary key, whether the relation is sorted on which attribute, how many tuples, these are just stored along with the relation itself. Right. So, what is the primary key for a relation is just part of the schema. Whether it's sorted or not, how many tuples, how many blocks, all of these information is stored in the database itself. So, we can see that information. Okay. So, ignore the down part here. Focus on just this one, the first one that I have highlighted. So, let's see. I literally just worked. I don't even know what the password is. Did that work? Yeah. Looks like that worked. So, I just want to execute this one. So, it's not executing that one for me. It's executing something else. Okay. So, this particular table called PG class, which exists in your database, even though you may not have ever seen it, that PG class is actually a little bit of a problem. So, this particular table called PG class, which exists in your database, even though you may not have ever seen it, that PG class table contains information like the number of rows, number of pages, and things like that. So, what you see here is that the badges table is estimated to have 153,000 rows, and it spans 1100 pages on disk. Okay. So, this information is stored in the table called PG class. Okay. And the PG class presumably also stores other information like whether it's sorted, but I'll actually have to check it. So, if I simply do a star on this, it's a little bit of a messy output. So, it stores a ton of information. You see who is the owner, number of tuples. It should, somewhere it should store what the sorted order is, but I'm not immediately seeing it here. But all of this data is used by the query optimizer to do the optimizations. Okay. So, in this case, we were primarily, if I can go back. Okay. I was primarily only focused on the number of rows and relation pages, number of pages. Okay. So, both of those are stored in this PG class table, and query optimizer effectively reads it and just uses it. Okay. So, primary key, whether it's sorted, what attributes, how many tuples, this is all kept in a table called PG class in PostgreSQL, all tab columns in Oracle, and so on. You can usually find the specific system tables very easily. These are sort of hidden from you, but you have access to them. And as long as you have permissions on the database, you have access to them. Okay. These are super admin tables, so you will not have access to them if you don't have the right privileges. Any questions so far? Not sure. So, these are basic stuff. Right? But, when I have to do something like, how many tuples match age greater than 40? That's a little more involved. a little more involved. I cannot just store that in the database. But what I am going to do is I am going to store a bunch of other information in the database so that I can estimate this. So specifically what I am going to store is so here is an example of what I will store. So in this case, for the table badges, I am outputting a few different things. This should be relatively easy to understand what it is. The first one is null fraction. How many of the values are null as a fraction? In this case, the answer is 0. But if I were to do this on posts, because I know posts has a bunch of null items, null entries, I start seeing much larger numbers. For instance, it tells me that 40% of the titles are actually null. 65% or 63% don't have an accepted answer are a parent ID. So this is an important information for me. Because this basically means that if I have a predicate on parent ID, two-thirds of the tuples don't even have a parent ID. Only one-third of the tuples have a parent ID. It also tells me how many distinct values I have for that attribute. So it tells me that, I don't know why it's, I don't know what the meaning of minus 6 here is, but score, it tells me that there are 175 distinct values of score. And I could verify this by simply going here and checking if that's actually true. Distinct score from posts. I get exactly 175. So in this case, it was pretty accurate. I'm not sure why title has a negative entry. There might be some implicit meaning to it, which I'm not familiar with. But at least for score, we know this number is accurate. Average width is the average width of the value in bytes. So post type ID, ID, they're all integers. So they have four bytes. But title, which is a character string, has a 54 bytes average. Now, here's a question. Let's say I have this score equal to 175 distinct values. How could I use it to answer a question about, let's say, score equal to 10? Okay. Okay. So I know that, I'm going to go just there. I know that number of distinct values for score is equal to 175. My predicate is, sigma score equal to 10 posts. What is the selectivity? Fraction that satisfies. So given this information, could I give an estimate for score equal to 10? Along with knowing that score is an integer. Anyone want to give me a quick answer on this? Just base, if I tell you that there are 175 different values for score, and then I put a predicate saying score equal to 10, how many tuppers do you expect will satisfy the condition? Let's say we take out the nulls. Yeah. Let's assume there are no nulls for now. Okay. But yes, we are right. Nulls will be taken care of. I don't remember. Did we have nulls in the score? Score actually does not have any nulls. So we are okay with score. Okay. But beyond that, how do I, how can I estimate the number of tuples that satisfy this condition? And again, the focus here is on the word estimate. You are guessing. Okay. In fact, the query optimizer is guessing quite a bit here. Maybe like, if the max score and the lowest, then like, find like the distribution of stored numbers, equal to 10. Okay. So that is true. But right now I'm telling you that this is all you know. You don't know anything else. All you know is that the number of distinct values is 175. And there are no nulls. You don't have the information about the size of the table? Oh, we do. So that's why there's a fraction. We don't care about the size in some ways. But yeah, we do know the size. But right now I'm just interested in the fraction. Like, what percent of tuples satisfy? That's why size doesn't matter here. Very simple answer. So we assume that it's a uniform distribution. And the answer is simply 1 over 175. We know there are 175 distinct values of score. I don't know anything else. I have to assume a uniform distribution. And if I assume a uniform distribution, for a score equal to 10, that allows me to estimate it to be 1 over 175. Okay. So, really, it will be quite simple. 1 over 175 is small. So, select 1 over 1.0 over 25. I think it was 25, 800. So, it says 147 tuples. Okay. So, score equal to 10 should have 175 tuples according to this estimate. Now, this is, of course, very wrong because it's not super wrong. It would be very wrong for 0. For 0, oops, I guess you can't see that. For score equal to 10, I actually have 400 rows. So, it says 147 here. That's the estimate we got. Whereas, score equal to 0 is 3735. So, there's a really big gap between 147 and 3735. This is acceptable gap for query optimization purposes. But, this is a large gap for query optimization purposes. We don't care about a factor of 2 or 3. That much error is, doesn't really matter for query optimization. A factor of 10 error matters. Okay. Because at that point, I might start choosing index join when index join is a really bad idea. Or, I might choose an estate loop join. It's a very bad idea. Okay. But, PostgreSQL didn't do this badly. Right? If I look at, if I look here, it estimated 3735. It's actually more or less accurate. So, it's more or less accurate here. It estimated it to be 3735. That's because PostgreSQL does have a lot more information than that. Okay. In particular, as was mentioned earlier, PostgreSQL does keep track of max and min. Okay. So, if I were to say, score equal to minus 500, it will estimate it to be, well, it doesn't like doing 0. So, it will do a 1. But, it knows that basically, there are no tuples expected. Because, minus 500 is probably beyond the bound it has. Okay. So, if it has a max and a min, and minus 500 is below the min, it can safely assume that there are no tuples that satisfy. But, PostgreSQL does not keep the statistics up to date. So, it's not going to decide that there are no results based on that. It will still run the query. Because, PostgreSQL statistics are not up to date. Okay. And so, and even then, even if they are up to date, you need to run the query. That's not an option. The only question here is the query plan. At this point, it can safely assume that there are no queries, no tuples that satisfy, and build a plan based on that. Okay. But, yeah, but, yeah, so that's, that's a max and min. But again, that's not, that's not enough. PostgreSQL does a lot more things, right? What, what else could you store, right? In addition to max min, what all, what all could we consider storing? Okay. So, for posts.score, I can keep number of distinct values. I can keep max min null fraction. Okay. What else could I keep? One thing that, well, anyway, someone wants to say something before I, give some hints here. One thing that, uh, really messes up, uh, uh, Quedra optimizer is, is a skew. Like, when there is a single tuple, that has a large percentage of, uh, uh, single value, that has a large percentage of tuples associated with it. Like zero. Right? For posts, zero was an example, which has a large mass. Like, like one, one sixth of the tuples had, uh, uh, a zero, uh, score. Because a large number of posts, on stack overflow, basically don't have any score. Okay. They just have a score of zero. The default score. So skew is quite problematic for, for PostgreSQL, for, for, for query optimizers. So most query optimizers will keep track of most likely values, or most common values. Okay. So they will keep track of most common values. So for instance, if I, if I go back here, and run one of the other queries that I had down here, this one, that was the one I was running earlier. Oops, not, that's not the one. Yeah. Yeah. What you will see is that PostgreSQL, but I shouldn't have sorted it, uh, it's, uh, it's, uh, better not to sort it. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So what it, uh, keeps track of are the most likely, or most common, uh, hundred values or something. Okay. So most common hundred values. So in this case, the most common hundred values are one, two, zero, three, four in the decreasing order. One is most common with, uh, forty-seven, uh, hundred tuples. Two is, uh, a little less common. Zero is a little less common. And so on. So the scores basically close to zero have the highest, uh, highest mass. Okay. These four account for almost, uh, sixty percent of the tuples. Okay. Uh, scores of zero, one, two, or three. They account for almost sixty percent of the tuples. So any queries that involve that, I would want to use this real value. Not my approximation. Based on one over one seventy-five. One over one seventy-five is going to be very wrong for these scores. Okay. And so this is again maintained in the stats table. If you, you see the query here, this is using a table called PG stats. And that table keeps track of the most common values and their frequencies. Uh, those are maintained as, uh, fractions. I converted them into, uh, uh, number of tuples that I'm multiplying by twenty-five hundred. Uh, but they are maintained as, uh, uh, real numbers. Okay. So again, this is information that PostgreSQL maintains in its statistics tables and it, you know, keeps track of it for you to look at, uh, for, for it to use when, uh, running, uh, queries, when optimizing queries. So if you do ask a query like, uh, score equal to ten, it has that number precisely because, uh, ten is one of the, uh, most frequently, um, ten is one of the most frequently, uh, most frequently occurring values. So it knows that number precisely. It's not guessing it. Okay. But when I say, uh, when I, earlier, when I did percent five, or percent, uh, uh, five equal to ten, that one, it was guessing. So this one, it's really not guessing. Yeah. Where did it go? This one, is it, it is guessing, but this one, it's not guessing. This number it has, it's coming, that 400 number is coming from that table that we just saw, whereas this score, percent ten equal to five, that one is guessing, and I have no idea how it's guessing that, because that guess seems quite wrong, and I don't have a, I don't have a good explanation of why. I mean, it's score percent ten, there are ten possible values. It should have really estimated it to be 2580. Yeah. If it didn't know anything, it should have still estimated it to be 2580, but it's effectively not doing anything smart at all. So something quite, quite, quite, yeah. I think PostgreSQL has a magic number of 1 over 20 somewhere. I believe this is 1 over 20, right? Nope, it's 1 over 200. Okay. So, yeah, for whatever reason, it's, it's making, the guess it has made for, that percent ten predicate, was basically 1 over 200. Yeah. So, because, remember, PostgreSQL is making guesses about fractions, so that's why I'm talking about 1 over 200, and the, the fraction it's guessing is 1 over 200, I, I don't know why. I wonder if it's the same fraction for other tables, which is other table with a large number of, uh, comments has a large number of table. Comments have score, I don't remember what comments has. Score. Okay. So, it's guessing 232. Analyze is, uh, not too off. 4. It still seems, uh, relatively, yeah, so still seems, approximately 200, 1 over 200. So, it looks like it's, uh, for this particular predicate, score percent ten, it seems to be guessing 1 over 200. Okay. Uh, this query optimizers have always had these magic numbers in them. Uh, magic constants, they were called in some papers. Uh, so in this case, PostgreSQL seems to be using a magic constant of 1 over 200. For predicates, it doesn't understand. Yeah. All right. Uh, any questions so far? Uh, so, um, so as I said, uh, uh, doing the estimations accurately is very important because you can really mess up if you don't. Um, the basic idea behind, uh, selectivity estimation is to maintain information like we saw just now. The more information we maintain, the more accurate estimations we get. But of course, there is a higher storage cost and update cost. Keeping these, uh, statistics up to date is not, uh, not cheap. In fact, PostgreSQL doesn't do it, um, uh, on a, like it does it on a periodic basis. Or, I think in default setting, you actually have to call vacuum analyze for it to, uh, create the statistics. So if you have a fresh database without, um, uh, having run vacuum analyze, it may not have good statistics at all. But I'm not 100% sure what it does and what it doesn't. Okay. The basic statistics that PostgreSQL maintains are things like, uh, not PostgreSQL, but all databases maintain. Number of tuples in a relation, number of blocks, uh, average width, the size, uh, number of distinct values we saw, max, min, and so on. Okay. So there is ton of information. If I were to go back here and, and sort of just look at, uh, look at PG stats table itself entirely, and that table is, is huge. It's, it's impossible to keep, uh, uh, to sort of follow what's going on in there. If you are going to run this, you'll see there is like so many things it keeps track of. Okay. There are histograms, which we haven't talked about so far, something called correlation, uh, uh, and a bunch of things. Okay. And there is more tables like this that keep more, uh, more information. Um, a range query, for instance, if I have a query that says a between x and y, if I know the max and min, then I can use that to sort of get a fraction of tuples that satisfy the condition, by effectively doing y minus x. So I look at the, sort of the range x to y, then look at the whole range max to min, and then I take a ratio of those two. And that gives me an estimate for how many tuples should satisfy, um, uh, this condition. The one, the statistics that we just briefly saw, but we haven't looked at yet, are what are called histograms. Histograms are even more detailed statistics, uh, in some ways. They're actually not as, uh, specific as the most commonly value, uh, most common values, but they are also kind of, uh, uh, more general because they cover, they allow you to cover larger attribute, uh, ranges. So what a histogram is, is it, it takes the, sort of the range of, the frequency distribution of the values, and approximates it. Okay. So here is an example of a histogram, on a zip codes. What this histogram is showing, is that, number of tuples that fall in the range, 20,000 to 20,199. So range of 200 values. In that range of 200 values, I have about 42,000 tuples. Okay. That's what this histogram is showing. Then it's showing that in the range, the next range, from 2200 to 2400, I have approximately 33,000 tuples. In the next range, I have slightly smaller number of tuples. In the next range, I have almost 45,000 tuples, and so on. So an histogram, this histogram, essentially, is keeping track of the frequency distribution across all values, but in an approximate, approximate to me. So, within this range, I will have to use uniformity of some sort. Okay. For instance, if I ask you, let's say, let's say this number was actually 45,000. Okay. So this was 45k. Okay. And I ask you, how many tuples with zip code 20700? Well, I know that in this 200 values, the total is 45,000. There are 200 values. I'm going to assume uniformity. So I will do 45,000 divided by 200. So I'll give you, whatever, 20 to 50 as the answer. Okay. So it's 45,000 divided among 200 values. Each of them is 225. Okay. So that's how the histograms are used, is that I have a better distribution across ranges, but within each range in the histogram, I assume they equal uniform distribution. Okay. And this can be used now, for instance, to answer questions, right? For instance, let's say, I'll work out an example here on paper. Let's say I have a histogram and this range is 0 to 4 and this is 100. Then I have a second range. Histograms make more sense when let's say there's 300 and this range is 5 to 9. And then I have a query that is, and let's say there's attribute A. I have a query that says A less than 2, less than 7. Okay. Less than or equal to. So now I can use this histogram to compute the answer because here I have 0 to 5. So this is equivalent to 2 less than or equal to A less than or equal to 4 or 5 less than or equal to A less than or equal to 7. So there are 3 values here and 3 values here. A can take 2, 3, 4 or 5, 6, 7. There are 5 values here. I'm interested in 3 of them. So that means that from that bucket I can expect 100 times 3 over 5. Because I assume uniform distribution in this bucket, each of the values has exactly 20 estimate and I'm interested in 3 of those. So I end up with 60. Plus, in the second bucket I have 300 and same 3 by 5 that gives me 180. And so the total is 240. So my estimate using this histogram my estimate for A between 2 and 7 is going to be 240. So that's how I can use the histogram. And again, the guiding principle here is that this is giving me information about ranges but within each range I assume uniform distribution. Okay. And that's another example showing that. Oh, right. I can add more inputs. Slide, slide, slide, slide. Okay. If the ranges are typically not full I can also keep track of the null fraction within each range and that can help me get better estimates. So in this case I am keeping track of 130 values that are not null. 42 values that are not null. 67 values that are not null. The more information I keep the more better statistics I am going to get. Okay. Because again the trade-off here is that more information means better estimation. More information means harder to keep it up to date. That I need to do more work to keep those numbers up to date. Okay. Any questions so far? Histograms are very widely used in practice. In PostgreSQL you will see so this is the query that was showing histograms. Okay. But it's a little bit harder to read. I actually had to look up what this was storing. PostgreSQL does what are called equidepth histograms not equidwidth. Okay. This here this here is an example of an equidwidth histogram. Every range is the same value. The alternative I have and I don't seem to have a picture here an alternative that I have is what's called an equidepth histogram. In an equidepth histogram the buckets all have the same height but the ranges are different. So what I have here is that this same number of two pulses present from 0 to 3 as from 3 to 10 as from 11 to 50 as from 50 to 60. So that's an equidwidth histogram where again the histogram is very similar but the basic ideas are very similar but here the width is approximately the height is approximately the same but the width is different. Okay. And so PostgreSQL here seems to be maintaining an equidwidth histogram. Okay. So these oops what happened I thought we were looking at that. So what we see here is there is a ranges of that equidwidth histogram. So what you are effectively saying here is that the same number of tuples is present between 2 and ignore this one that's a score same number of tuples is present between minus 11 and minus 9 minus 9 and minus 8 91 and 92 92 and 94 and so on. This is very approximate. Okay. It doesn't actually make sense given the size of the table we have. This is a very detailed histogram for the 25,000 tuples we have but that's what it is. It's a equidwidth histogram. And note that PostgreSQL did go ahead and build it even though our tables are quite small. They are really more useful for larger tables but they are present here as well. We are almost at time. Any questions on what we have covered so far? I did have two more slides to cover in this topic but we will do that in the next class. Okay. So what we did not discuss is how to do joins. So that we'll cover in the next class. So what we have talked about so far are the statistics in databases and how to use them for selection queries. We'll wrap up by covering how to use them for joins in the next class and then cover the search algorithms. But before we stop, any questions? All right. I will see you on Thursday.

