 So we'll continue our discussion of query processing optimization today. But before I do that, any questions or
anything else, comments? Have you started?  So, I said, I mean, slides been posted. These slides are posted, yes.
Nothing.  And we're in the morning. Anything else? All right.  So, um, just to kind of recap, uh, we are now going
through the discussion of uh, how very processing engines are actually built. sort of the steps in the steps that we're
going to do. We've talked about play plans last time, and I'll briefly review that, especially the hydrator model. And
then we'll, today we'll uh, uh, start going through the implementations of operators.  Hopefully we can cover these, but
let's see, these two. And then we'll next class, we'll start talking about the next issues. We'll talk about what
happens when we have a large data sets that exceed the amount of memory we have, and we'll talk about query
optimization, how to find the best query plan for a new inquiry.  And then we'll talk about what happens in a parallel
or distributed system like Apaches Park or a, you know, a big data warehouse to some extent. Not the topics will go too
deep into, but we'll talk about them briefly. Okay.  To recap a couple of things we talked about last time, we discussed
the notion of query plans, and a query plan is nothing but kind of a chain or a tree of operators, which at the bottom,
we usually draw in bottom up, like the base duration at the bottom and the result at top, but you might sometimes
flip it or do it sideways and so on. The acquitted plan simply shows how we are going to take the relations we have,
the base data we have, and executive the query on top of it. How do we combine it, join it, aggregate it?  And as an
example, we saw this very simple query plan which has a selection followed by a join, followed by a projection. And
since we when we talked about many languages, we also talked about the sort of more pipeline query languages, like
the Spark or Mongo DB. So if you kind of have that clear in your mind, the operator 3 essentially looks like a
pipeline.  It's just like a tree, but mostly it's almost identical to a pipeline. The other key thing we talked
about is the fact that in a database system, the operators we have, which I call physical operators, they are often
different from the logical operators. And there are many reasons for it.  But this is the actual operators that will
instantiate in post-grass, because the query plan that possesses your outputs is literally just a list of operators
it uses. Okay? And those operators are going to be the physical operators it has.  And in this case, for instance,
there is a sequential scan operator, which is oftentimes not an explicit operator, but might be combined with the
next operator. There is a hash operator which builds a hash table, we will see why today. And then there is a joint
operator, which does the joint using the instructor relation and the hashtable.  Okay. So one of the key things that
I want you to take away from this discussion is the ability to read query plans. You may not be able to fully
understand it.  We saw some query plans last time, which just looked very complicated and they had this data flow,
like the flow, the data going back and forth, which wasn't very obvious. But at least for simple queries, somewhat
like, you know, nothing too fancy going on, like sub queries or width classes, you should be able to read them. And
then as you get, you know, if you really need whatever you are doing, the projects you are doing are, and I don't
mean in this class, but later on, in your job, if you need to read them better, you'll figure that out.  Right now,
my goal is to make sure you can understand the basic query plans on how to read them. And later on today, once we do
the review, well, basically going to start talking about the physical operators, where we'll talk about how these
operators are actually implemented in a system like post-rescure, and more generally. Any questions so far?  Now,
one other thing that's going to be important for us, uh, for today, is this, um, The notion of uh, uh, an iterator
model. And I really should change these slides because iterator models are not specific to pipelining. In fact, that
is how post-priskure and many other systems implement operators at all, whether it's by planning or materialization,
that's how they influent operators.  It a software engineering practice more than anything else. It's a way to make
the operators more composable. So the phenomical idea behind the iterical model is that each operator, the fiscal
implementation of an operator, will have 3 calls.  We are simplifying a lot here, but you know, there is enough to
understand what's going on. It'll have 3 calls. It'll have an open car.  It will implement an open car. the next
call, then you'll give it a close call. Like in a python, for instance, we might have an abstract class that defines
these 3 functions and then select sort of subclasses that, okay? And then select needs to define its own open next
circles.  And the semantics of the way we use this is this is this is demand driven. What it means is that the
execution will be driven by the top operator. So in particular, when you say, show me the tupulse, it will make a
call to this operator.  That operator will return by calls to its children, child, that child will make calls to its
children and so on. And these calls will be all be made using the next function. Open and close are to set up and
destroy all the data structures.  Next is the sort of the logical execution that's happening. And so the next call
is the one that we largely focus on. So in the next call, the 1st call and next to buy them, it says, okay, the my
parent note or my parent, whoever it is, is calling for the next 2 person.  Let me see, let me get that people from
my child. And that child says, okay, let me get that from my children. That one says, okay, let me get that from my
child.  And eventually you end up at the relations and the relations have the tuples. Okay. And so then, at that
point, the two parts will flow back up.  And of course, in order to join, you kind of have to find a matches and all
of that logic is going to happen the next call. Okay, we'll talk about examples of this sort of throughout rest of
today. Any questions on any of this?  And again, you can ask me more questions after we go start going through the
implementations. Okay. open open as I see this has for this slide open openens everywhere. Correct. you need one
open so open everything or you have to open every single time.  So every operator open is used by the operators to
initialize their state, whatever they need to do. And so that's why the open call has to proposate from top to all
the way to the bottom. For instance, if these are implemented as files, if the relations at the discard files, the
open call will open the file.  Okay, but won't read it. It will just open it. The hash joint, if I'm using a hash
joint here, then I would create the hash table, but I won't like build it.  I will just create the data structure. I
will say new hashtable. Okay.  So those are things that are happening at open, so that's why every operator has to
implement its own open. And then they have to make sure they call the open on their children so that the children
can also get initialized. Everyone needs to get initialized before we can start the actual processing.  And same
goes for clothes. Close is the opposite of open, we sort of close everything. Any data structures we have, we try to
destroy them.  Most skill has a really nice way of dealing with memory. It allocates a large chunk of memory for the
entire query plan. So you don't see the, you don't see delete in in post-grass cure, right?  It will, like, if it
created a hashtable, it will not destroy that hashtag. What it will do is, once the query is done, it will
essentially throw away the entire memory context. Okay.  So it has created this large memory to execute a particular
query, and once a query is done, it will just throw away that memory. And that's crucial because individually
deleting things is very expensive. And there's some some of the nice things that Poseriskill does.  And other, I'm
sure other databases do as well. In many ways, postguest collection has its own memory manager. Okay, what it does
is it gets the, it gets the operating system to give it a large chunk of memory, virtual memory, and then it manages
within that and then delays the whole thing.  Any other questions on this? So let's jump into the some of the
implementations. Um, Actually, before we do that, there is 11 topic that I don't need to cover.  And that's a topic
of cost. Okay. Throughout this discussion, not in a ton of detail, but somewhat.  We will talk about the cost of an
operator. We will need this for ultimately doing the query optimization and so on. If you remember, when we were
looking at PG admin, you still have it open.  Yeah. When we were looking at easy admin last time, Yeah. When we were
looking at PGRL last time, it had a cost at various points.  So it estimates, and if I do, I'll explain, analyze, it
will show me the real costs as well. So you can see that it has the estimated cost and it has the real cost or
actual time. Cost is a measure of, you know, whatever we're trying to optimize for something, right?  We're trying
to do it in the best way possible. The only way to do best is to have a definition of what we're counting, what
we're measuring. And that, what we're mentioning is what we're going to call cost.  Now, the problem with databases,
and in general systems, is that cost has become incredibly complicated to calculate. In a long time ago, in the
earliest databases, you kind of use one number. You sort of talked about the number of blocks you read.  How many
blocks you had to read from disk in order to execute the query? And you were kind of done. That was your metric.
 The query plan that our query plan plus techniques that minimize the number of blocks you read was the best one.
Today, we have to worry about so many different things. Let me, what is my power point?  Um, Today, we have to worry
about CPUs, instructions, we have to worry about number of discires, how many blocks I'm reading, whether it's
sequential or random, how much network I'm using, how much memory I'm using, uh, modern high performance systems
worry about things like cash misses, uh, how many, you know, caches are missing and this. There is some really deep
work that even looks at issues like how many times you have to do context switches in the CPU registers. If you are
trying to get the best performance out of your system, of your hardware, you can have to worry about many of these
things.  Okay. So today's cost calculations have become relatively complicated. Um, you, and another challenge is
that you want to make sure that whatever you're optimizing for is actually the bottleneck.  Now, if you have a tons
and tons of memory, you don't really want to care about memory as much. okay? If you are using SSDs, maybe you don't
care about random versus sequential as much. If you have an insane, if you are in data center, and you have like a
really fast network, you probably don't care about the network.  So you need to know you need to know what you
actually care about. Okay, that's another thing that makes this challenging. So typically what we see, um, is some
sort of a weighted, uh, uh, uh, metric.  What you do is for each query plan, let's say, let's say I'm trying to
decide between two, 3 query plans. For each query plan, I'll I'll estimate the number of amount of memory it uses,
and I'll estimate the amount of discires it uses, and I'll do a weighted some of those too. Something like that.
 Okay. Generally speaking, in the, in the, uh, uh, databases, we, most databases typically look at these 2 things.
So how much CPU you are using, like how much CPU a query plan uses, and how much disk IOS it uses.  And that
combination of those 2 is what it tries to optimize for. But this question does not have a very simple answer.
Depending on your setup, maybe you are an in memory database.  If you're in memory database, you really don't care
about this guyos. Okay? Cash misses become much more important for you.  Because, you know, in memory database, the
assumption is that the database is small enough or the memory is large enough that the database fits in memory. And
as a result of it, this is unimportant. Network is unimportant because these are usually single machine databases.
 So what I care about is the, is things like cash misses. So it, the, the, the issue of deciding what to optimize
for is an important one, and then given that, you know, then the next, next steps follow. We're talking about cause.
 This is, like, the cost, like, for what, exactly? Like, to make a break, or to... To execute the question.  We do
care about the cost of optimizing itself, but that's a separate issue. This is about cost of the actual query
execution. Um, so what we do is, uh, we buy and let are going to focus on the amount of uh, disk blocks you need to
process, so we'll simplify things a little bit.  We'll try to calculate for every operator that we look at. We'll
try to calculate how much how much this blocks it ends up needing to read from the disk. And in some cases we'll add
in the CPU costs as appropriate.  Okay? This is simplification, but what it works, and it should be okay enough for
now. The textbook, if you were to try to match what we discussed with textbook, textbook uses a cost function that
differentiates between random iOS and sequential iOS.  The textbook still focuses on hard disks heavily, and as
we've discussed a couple of classes ago, in hard disks, random IO versus sequential IO, there is an extremely large
gap, like a factor of 1000 or more. And so they care about whether you are IOS are random or they're sequential. So
we are going to ignore that for now.  Um, All right, so let's start talking about updated implementations. Okay. I'm
going to do a combination of pseudocode and something in between.  There's not how I've done in the past. So if you
did look at slides from previous years, just make sure you sort of look at the latest slides. A very simple
selection operation.  Select star from person where SSN is one, 2, 3. This is what the implementation of that of a
select operator might look like using a sequential scan. Okay, so we're just scanning the relation start to end.
 Very simple. And let's make sure we understand this, okay? Because everything from this proton builds upon this.
 Um, the open call. The open call simply opens the table. Okay.  So in this case, uh, it's using a table scan
operator, it's a table stamp function inside. So let's assume that table scan might be reading a 5 card person. So
the open call, all it does is it opens the file.  It really depends on exactly how the data is stored, but you know,
one way it might be is that each table, like person, is a separate file. Then, in the next call, Remember, the
definition of the next call is that when you call it, it returns you multiple. Not five, not zero, well, it can turn
zero, zero is the end of output.  But the its goal is to return one to people. Okay. Unless it does not have any
tuples to return, at which point the execution stops for that operator.  So this is a very simple next call. It
looks at the next tupel. Uh, if the next Tupal is, uh, end of, like we have every stand of five, it returns end of
five.  Uh, and then if it does have a tupel, it checks whether the tupel is uh, one, two, three. SSN is one, two,
three. And if it is one, two, three, then it returns it.  So very simple implementation. I'm going through this step
by step because it does get complex quickly. So I want to make sure we are comfortable with this before we get into
the more complex ones.  Any questions on this basic studio? Other way, you, like, I used to have a python-based
programming assignment for this course like 10 years ago. The code for many of these operators is literally like
this much in the database.  And it's a functional database that can run queries, not very well. It's written in
Python, so it's not really going to be fast, but it could run quite simple queries. And the entire source code for
that single query was for that toy database was like a few 100 lines of code.  And then the clothes will go ahead
and close the scan. Okay. Whatever, if there is an open file, it will close the file.  Make sense? Any questions?
Simple enough.  Now, I can't hide this in my core business, right? This is one question. So I'm gonna have to, you
know, parameterize this a little bit.  In this case, the parameterization is relatively simple. The open call will
modify that to include a table name. attribute position, and explain what that is. The operator we want to execute
at a constant.  So this can handle predicates like A equal to 5 A greater than 5 B equal to B less than 6. things
like that. It can handle a variety of different operators in a single core base. And now, in a table stand, instead
of opening person file, open the table name.  And then, In this case, I'll outsource some of the complexity of
evaluating different operators to a helper function called valued. This evaluate function, in turn, will take the
operator. The, the value of the attribute for that purpose, so deep pause is the value of the attribute for that
position.  And then you take the constant and then return yes or no. Okay, return to our false. So this is a simple
way I can take that code ahead and just make it make it work for arbitrary. arbitrary conditions that involve a
constant.  Okay. So this cannot do A equal to B. Okay, because one of them has to be a constant, but it can do equal
to five, a less than 5 a greater than 5 and so on. It can also have the different data types.  So T-Pos here could
be a string. Now, if I'm doing an equality on string, that's gonna look different than an equality on integers. So
that will have to be handled inside of this evaluate by sort of having case, a case, branches.  Okay. So case
statement on the operator and the data type is enough to handle these a bunch of different operators for a bunch of
different data types. And this is the kind of code you will see in post rescue.  Okay. So if you were to go dig and
ignore all the sort of stuff that's required but not essential for the actual query processing part, This is
fundamentally the code you will see in a system like Puskisk. Any questions on this?  This makes sense? Now, in the
rest of the code, I will not show these paracterizations. The cold gets too complicated.  Okay, but just keep in
mind that whatever code that we see from this point on, um, um, can be parameterized in this fashion to handle, you
know, different relations, different positions, different data types, and so on. The cost of a sequential scan
operator, which is simply scanning the relation statue and is going to be, if I'm looking at the number of blocks it
read, that's going to be the number of blocks of that relationship. So if the relation is spread across 100 blocks,
that's my cost here.  The CPU cost will be order of the size of the table name. The problem here is that I don't
know what the constants here are, you know, like the CPU cost, if I'm measuring the instructions, I cannot need to
know how many instructions each of these things is gonna take me. So that's hard to easily write down.  So it is
that we're taking, like, one big, like, I guess, query or instruction, and we're breaking it into 3 different words.
For the for the implementation purposes, yes. But really, the primary one we care about is the next one.  That's
where all the processing is happening. I guess my question is, can this be like condensed into like one like sort of
fery? Is this like an expansion or is this a?  So this is the code to execute this query. The query is this one.
Okay.  And this executes this very simple query with a single operator. Generally speaking, I have a pipeline of
operators. I love multiple operators.  In this case, I have a single operator to execute this squarely. Okay. So,
the cost would be the comfort of times.  Um, for the CPU cost? Yeah, basically. We have to have like the actual
constants around it is order are they're harder to estimate you.  People make the, in the data systems, you will see
some numbers they just use kind of some standard numbers that they use for these purposes. One of the things to
remember is that we only need these costs to be relative to each other. Like we don't need the precise time.  We
just need to be able to compare to implementation. So as long as the relative costs are Correct, we are kind of
good. And that's why, like, kind of approximations are okay.  It doesn't need to be precise. You know the questions
on this? Okay.  Now, we may have a B plus three on SSN. Okay. So, if we have a bootless stream, we have a 2nd option
here.  Sequential scam was one option. The 2nd option is to use the B plus three. So using the B+3, the code kind of
might look something like this.  Okay, very high level code. So here, I opened the people street. Okay, so this
weekly look up coding code again.  There is a bunch hidden here, but discord is supposed to look up the tree and
find the tupal with K equal to 123. Okay, so in the, in the lookup itself, it actually finds the find fit to put,
and then the next call on this index will give you the next step that matches. Okay, so this simplifies the code a
little bit, but with a B plus train, this code is, again, ideally a lot faster because now instead of scanning the
relation start to end, I'm able to quickly go straight to the to the tupel that matches.  Okay. So in this case, I
would be able to go straight to the Tupel with SSN equal to one. And if I do have a B plus tree, the cost is much
lower.  As long as the B plus tree is, you know, the number of duples I'm returning is small. So in this case,
there's only one tupel I'm going to return because SSN is, you know, expected to be a key for this duration. So the
number of blocks, right, is going to be the height of the elect.  Remember, the B plus 3 has a height. Um, So it's
going to be the height of the index +one. So here's an ignore the top part here.  I just have an example of the B
plus tree. If I'm looking for, let's say, Mozart, the cost of that is I have to read this lock. I have to read this
lock.  I have to read this block, so that's the height of the B plus three. Plus, I have to go and read this log. So
that's where the 4 comes from.  The height of the index, which is 3 plus one. Okay. And now, of course, there's a
secondary index.  There are multiple Mozarts. I would need to read multiple blocks from the relation. So the cost
calculations get a little trickier or not, they're not trickier.  They're just tedious and hard to write down. In
the book, you will see this big table with 8 separate cases and the formulas for each one of them. I don't care for
you to memorize the formulas, but if I were to tell you, estimate the number of blocks here for a query, you should
be able to do that.  Okay. Because that's the foundation here is that the fundamental thing here used to be able to
walk to sort of walk through the fold of this or walk through the process of finding all to persuade a neighborhood
to Mozart or sing. and then go through this and figure out how many blocks you have to read. So, if the new one, the
most first, I'm gonna say those two Mozarts in that the bottom table, will it be +2 instead or still plus?  Plus
two. So this one here was assuming that we are doing a primary key lookup or a key lookup. So there's only one
output.  But for a, for a secondary index, we have to, or even for a primary index, but if the number of results is
larger, you have to do multiple multiple block fages. But it does get a little bit trickier. For instance, this
election is sorted by I. Okay, and if I were to do a range query on ID, um, using an index like this.  So not this
index, but using a separate index that's on ID. And if I were to do a range query, even if I'm returning 10 to
pulse, those 10 triples are all consecutive. So I will not be reading 10 separate blocks for it.  I'll be reading
fewer blocks. Because they are consecutive. That's a question.  And these are the calculations that you do have to
do in the core base because these are different cases that do have to be considered. And so if you go to the book,
you will see, as I said, a table with like 7 or 8 separate cases and a formula for each one of them. I think trying
to remember or understand this formula is not really helpful.  What you need to be able to understand is how those
formulas came to be, and then you can take that and generalize that to other settings. This is especially important
today because today we see so much diversity in the index structures that that formula in the book is not going to
apply. For most modern database systems.  Because modern databases use very different index structures than the
databases from 30 years. 20, 30 years ago, every database had the same index structures, but that's not true
anymore. So this is a secondary index, and if I'm looking for all instructors with name, let's say name S, if I'm
looking for all instructors with name S, I would come down here, and I have 2 of them. I have to go find Sim, and
then I have to go find Shinivasan. 2 separate, one is here, one is here.  So these are random accesses. I'll be
going here and I'll be going there. Yeah.  Any questions? We talked about Ellis, uh, lock structured merch, please.
The lock structure most please.  I'm going to have a different calculation altogether, if I'm using them. If you
remember, the steps in log structure merge tree is that we 1st look at the in memory SS table. If we find it in
memory assessable, we are done.  If we don't find it immediately accessible, we have to start going through those
levels. Okay. And so calculating the number of or calculating the cost of using a data structure like this is going
to require a little bit of work.  I'm not going to go through that. I'm just highlighting how you would work out
that one. You would have to work it out by estimating what is the chance I find it in memory, then if Ajemi, I don't
find it in memory, how many of the sorted runs do I have to go through?  Those are the estimations you would have to
do in order to be able to estimate the cost of a lookup using a LSPM. Okay, MS empty. Any questions?  Hi. Uh, just
briefly, uh, before we jump into joints, uh, selections with ranges are very common. So it's very common to say find
me all accounts with balance more than 10,000 or 100,000.  Uh, and so on. The sequential scan can always be used for
any credit. Sequences can allow you to look at each tuple one by one.  So whatever predicate you have, I can do it
using sequential scan. But you could also use an index if I have an index on the right interview. So if I have it on
ballots, I could use it to answer this question.  If I have a index or match it, I could use it to answer this
question. Okay. And again, as I just discussed on the previous example here, a range query here, a S, finding all
instructors with MS, requires random access into the relation because those S 2 cars are spread out.  So you have to
be careful if you are using a secondary index. So range query with a secondary index is usually not a great idea.
Because a secondary index requires you to go jump around in the relation and that can get expensive.  Yeah. Um,
multi-attribute selections can also be handled without too much issues. So if you have things like A, equal to one
and B, equal to two, again, sequential scan is always possible.  If you have an index of A, you can use that to 1st
find duples with A equal to one, and then apply the B equal to in memory. You can also do index ending, which we
discussed in a previous class, so I won't discuss that here. You don't really interchanning is common in databases.
 It doesn't really require a separate operator. You can do it as part of the index operator itself. Next, we'll talk
about joints, which will probably take us the risk, maybe not.  Let's say, arrest of the class. The goal of the join
is to find matching to pass. Okay, so the technology here is important to get comfortable with, but we are trying to
find pupas that match, that join.  We'll primarily talk about equity joints, but we'll also talk about queries like
this, which are not equal joints. So again, the goal of the joy operator is to find all matching pupils for the 2
relations. The simplest algorithm for joints is really simple.  It's the nesting loose joint. You go through every 2
parin R, you go through a typical S and then you check if the condition is true. Very simple 2 loops.  If the 2
relations are files, I can simply, you know, open the file, go through it, open the file, go through it, and just
loop through the 2 of them multiple times. R, I only look through once. S, I look through many times.  So I have to
be a little bit careful here because this is going to be expensive. The cost of this, especially the computational
cost of it, is going to be in our times NS. If NS a number of relations, a number of couples in R, and S is a number
of people say S, then these two loops are going to be NR times NS.  Okay. National loops can get, they can grow up
very quickly with 10,000 to plus each. We are talking about 1000000000 instructions. 10,000 to plus doesn't sound
like a lot.  But 10,000 times 10,000 is 100 million. Model computers will struggle, like even this laptop will
struggle to do 1000000 instructions. Okay. 1000000 is kind of comfortable for these laptops to do quickly.  They can
do it, like it takes time, but 1000000 is will be quick. 100 million, you will be waiting if you get this, if you
get this computer to do a loop in, uh, uh, that's that's a 1000000 loop, it will wait. Okay. You'll be waiting for
some time.  And 10,000 is, but not particularly large. We are talking about relations with 1000000s of tuples. So
this is, no, it exists.  It's there in the database implementation. The database system has to be extremely careful
in using it. It only uses it when it's sure that one of the relationships is very, very small, like a few tuples.
 Okay, which is surprisingly common. The relation itself might not be fuel to pills, but you often have selections
on the YouTube offer have conditions. You might have and R dot B equal to 10.  Okay. So R itself might be a 1000000
to pulse. But our would be equal to 10 might only be 5 couples.  So at that point, this becomes feasible. But as it,
as it is without any conditions like this, you would never use nested loops joint. Now, a distinction between a
physical and logical operator again comes into play here.  When we were looking at post-guyscale yesterday, we
actually saw our last week. We actually saw nested loops being used quite a few times. If I still have the query.
 So you saw it being used here. If someone want to say why this was okay, even though I didn't really have a
particularly selective, uh, selective condition here. Take a pause and see, literally, think about this query.  Why
is this necessary looks okay, even if the relations are very large? I know that it would have picked it, even if I
did not have this condition. I could get rid of this condition, and I suspect it will probably still pick it.  Oh, I
guess not. We also did the... Okay, um...  Anyone? So, I think that this is okay because we're already liating.
liiming the amount of I make my states It is, but that's not the only reason. There's also, this is also not the,
the, uh, algorithm that we just saw.  It's not It's not this. It's actually not this. Does someone want to?  Anyone
thoughts on why it's not the same algorithm? Even though it does say, nested look in our drawing here. And the key
here is to look at the inputs here.  Not that one input is a relation. The second input is an index. It's not a it's
not a relation.  So this is, in fact, not this algorithm. Okay. It's not doing this.  It is going through every
tuple in takes. So it is going through every topple intakes, but it is not going through every topple in S. So the S
is, the 2nd relation is the student here. So it is going through the entire takes relation to pull by Tupel with
this condition.  I think this condition really takes. So it's applying this condition and then after applying the
condition, it's going through duples of takes. But on student, it's not doing this loop.  Here that we are seeing
here, but instead it's using an index. Think about what is the, let me clear, let me clear the income this. Think
about what is the purpose of this?  Purpose of this is to find all 2 person S with a particular value of A. Okay.
Because outer loop loops through articles. Now, for a given artuple, the inner loop is looking for S to pulse with
that value of A. It's using a scan to go through it, but it could also use an index to go through it.  And that's
what that, that, the, the, the plan that we're seeing post rescue, this plan is actually using an index on student,
uh, uh, the, the, physical operator core is still a nested loops, but instead of uh, uh, doing an actual loop on the
2 relations, it's it's using an index. So for every rowing takes, we have a range query operations, right? Equality
actually, but yeah.  Yeah. And equality of, because we are looking at, um, It's a natural joint. So natural joint
between takes and student is on the student ID.  Uh, and so it's uh, looking up uh, for every 2 point it takes,
whatever the student ID for that takes to police, which is the name next to part time student. Okay. The
alternative, which is what we were discussing on this, was a sequential scan through student, but instead of being a
sequential scan for student, it's going to use an index.  So this is, again, the part of the reason I showed this is
to this thing, again, emphasize the distinction between the physical operator and the and the logical operator. Even
though the physical operator here is a nested in a loop joy, the logical operator here is what's called an index
nested loop joy. Oops. is an index nested groups join.  It's a variational listed loop joint where the inner loop is
not an actual scan, but is an index. So in this case, same quoi, let's as if there's an index on S dot A, for every
2 per in R, we'll use the index to find S to plus with that value of A. Okay. And this works well if the if the
index on S is a primary index, if it's not a primary index, then if it's a secondary index, then it becomes
expensive. possibly.  It kind of depends on, you know, all of these calculations are being done by the optimizer to
decide, should I do this? Should I do that? You know, the optimizer is making these decisions.  Okay. So, basically,
what that we, uh, returning, has into like a list of indexes, and whatever you are, what's going through, everything
has to see, which one is that might have no estimate. Right, but remember, S here is a relation.  So S is a relation
with two pals. So the index is built on all the triples of S. Any other questions on this? All right.  Um... Uh,
index and setup join has restricted applicability. Of course, you must have the index and idealates a primary index.
 Uh, you can't do queries like uh, R.A. mass, is dot, uh, like typical queries like this, you almost never uh, use
the index, even though, in theory, this I could handle through use of the index on A, uh, by sort of manipulating
the ranges, but the databases just don't have code for it. Like they won't, they won't do that optimization, even if
that optimization is clear, it's obvious they wouldn't really do that. Index nested loop joint is great for queries
with joints and selections.  Um, because this is exactly the kind of query that we saw earlier where we put the
condition on the ear, uh, takes out ear, and that condition reduced the size of the takes relation enough that index
nested loops and made sense. But the moment we did not have that condition, it refused to use the index nested lips.
Right?  It switched to using a hash joint. Think of hash joint as being more stable but more expensive. Like hatch
joint is kind of very clear cost.  We talk about hydrogen in a few minutes. It's a very clear cost, but it's a
higher cost. Index and estate loop joint can have a low cost and can have very high cost.  Whereas hatch joint is
kind of very stable cost, okay? So, the delay is optimizer is trying to decide, should I take the risk of using the
index loop join here? Because index loops join, assuming that the estimates are correct, will be much faster.  But
then, assuming the estimates are wrong, it will be much slower. And so we kind of have to balance balance between
those. Ah Any questions on Nested Loop genre, index, Instet Loop Join?  How's the complexity change when you use the
index? Um, say, I don't, I just realized that I don't have the numbers in here, but um, what we can do is the
numbers that we saw here, they can be generalized, uh, uh, they can be... Is that, I'm on this.  Okay. The numbers
that we saw for selection, they can be used to infer the numbers for nested loops joint. So this is the inner loop,
okay?  of the nested loops joint, right? The selection operation. So if I'm doing the nested loop, loop within loop,
then for every people in R, I'm paying this cost for S. Okay.  But if I'm using the index, then for every triple of
R, I'm paying this cost, yeah. So that's that's kind of how you do the calculations for nested lips, John. Yeah, I
think while modifying the slides earlier today, I must have taken that slide out.  Another question? What exactly do
you mean when you say index? It's a deep history.  Okay. Typically be plus three, but any index, anything, any surf
stream that allows me to quickly find 2 specific pupils. Okay.  Whereas my goal here, for a given R tuple, is to
find all S tuples with the same value of A. So that's a search query. Okay. So any index data structure, B plus
free, binary tree, um, AVL trees, 2, 3, whatever tree you want, any of them could work.  Database is typically
support B plus trees, so we focus on people's trees. Now, what if, uh, what if I don't have an index? And I suddenly
can't do this.  Lets say my relations are too big. Okay. Well, if I don't have an index, let me build an index in
memory.  Okay. So that's what has John is. Hi John is going to go ahead and build an index in memory.  So here,
we're doing the same joint, RS. Actually, that should not be indented. There's no reason for this indentation here.
 Um, Let's assume this is a smaller relation, and I'm doing the same query. I got A equal to S. A. What I'm gonna do
is I'll read S in memory and I'll build a hashtable of it. Literally just build up my standard hashtable.  The key
of the hash table is going to be A. Okay. So, in effect, I'm grouping together all triples of S by the A values. So
there is a hashtable available in memory.  If I'm writing this in Python, I will literally just use a dictionary.
Okay. And in the dictionary, I would essentially build the build this hashtable using a dictionary.  Then once the
hashtable is built, I will go through the triple say, ah, and then use this hashtable to find a matching purpose.
Because again, remember, my goal here is to find matching the purse. Okay.  I can find a, like, given, or given a
2ple in R, I can find the matching 2 pulse by scanning S by using an index on S or by using a hash table on S. All
of them are valid ways of doing that. So here's what that code looks like in Python. Okay, a Pythonish language.  So
when we walk through this, what's happening here? The open club code here is going to build a hashtable. Not here,
it will actually building the hatch.  Okay. So this is a hash table that we are building on on S. Okay. And just to
remind you, a hash table will have things like, you know, so there's a simple way to think of a hash table is these
are the keys.  And then I have the values, and the key is going to be the values of A, and then for each key, I'll
have a pointer to a list of S tuples, right? That's what a hashtag is. And this high level has been built on S. The
key is the value of attribute A. So for every possible value of attribute A, that I can find an S, I will have an
entry last table that entry with connected to a list of tuples with that same value of A. Okay.  So if there are 5
to plus, with A equal to one, this list here will have 5 esters. So this is like building a B plus 3 style index,
but I'm building it in memory, and it only works because essence is small enough to fit in memory. Okay, all my
memories large enough to fit S. But this only makes sense if I have large memory, which is why the earliest database
systems did not have this, because the earliest database systems were limited by memory, significantly limited by
memory.  And so they preferred using sorting-based techniques, because starting-based techniques are don't require
as much memory. Hashing-based techniques require you to build these hash tables and hash tables take up a lot of
memory. Okay.  So, what's happening here in the open clock, call is actually in the high table. And on S, so the
hashtable contains 2 because of S, killed by the value of A attribute. Then I'm opening the article, R relation.
 Okay. I'm not scanning R. That's gonna happen in the next call.  In the next call, now this code is slightly
backwards here, but in the self that matches, in the very 1st call, self-guard matches is empty. So I kind of go
down here. I get the 1st to pull up R.  For that to pull up R, I look up the matches. So for any tuple of R, I take
the value of A for it, and I look to see if there are matching tuples in this harsh table. If there are matching 2
puns, I can start returning them one bar.  Every, again, every next call will return a single result. So that's why
I have to have this data structure to keep track of what matches are already been returned and so on. So, uh,
self-card matches will contain all matches for a given R to people, but they will only be returned one at a time.
 Okay. And so we are using simplified pop here to remove that people from the matches and then combine it with R and
return it to the to the calling function. And that's it.  Okay. There's different ways to write it. But there is a
pretty simple way to rent it.  Yeah. And then once I'm done with one R to pulp, I will, the self that more matches
will become empty. At that point, I'll go ahead and look at the next article.  If an R-tuple does not find a match,
I will just keep going to the next article. So this will keep going through all the articles and ultimately it will
exhaust the articles at which point it can return an end of mind. Any questions?  And this basically implements this
pseudo code here, uh, which says that you build a hash table, and then for each to pull in art, uh, use the index to
find all matching tickles. The cost of this is significantly lower. It's a number of blocks of R because you read S
once and you read R once.  So it ends up being significantly lower. compared to the nested loops joint. And the CPU
cost is also much better for this. High joints tend to have good, good CPU.  Uh, CPU behavior. So overall, you will
see high joints being used quite frequently once the relations sizes are large enough. So postless cure, you will
primarily use harsh joints, pretty much all of these examples that we saw, I think, had some variation of harsh
joint or the other.  So this was a high joy, this is a high joy. Uh, this had a hash joint. This one did not have a
high joint because the sizes of the relations were very small.  Not the base relations, but these with clause
relations. They have very small multiple number of duples. But yeah, you see from almost all of these joint queries,
it actually used a harsh join.  Because that's the most common one. You also note that in this code here, The hash
table is a separate operator. Okay.  Uh, and hash inner joint is a separate operator. So the code we saw just now.
In this code, we are, we have the hash table being built inside the Hashuan operator, but that's not how post-grad
school does it.  Pusket skill has a separate hash operator and which gets used by many other operators, and then it
has a separate hash inner joint operator. So, It's like, post-trace doesn't make a full joint table 1st and then
applies the condition specified in the weight clause. That'll be too expensive.  Yeah. I should have discussed that
as the 1st that is like nested loops join, basically. So nested loops join, in effect, matches every art couple with
every S tuple.  But that's too expensive. Any other questions on this court? Or this hash try?  Okay. Uh... It is
cold, as I mentioned, the hair joint is built, uh, built in the open call.  Typically, we in the iterator model,
there's a standard principle that we don't touch the data in the open call. Um, so, but again, that's more of a uh,
principle than a requirement. And so typically, if you see post-grade scale core base, the hashtable will actually
be built here.  So the 1st call to next will build a hash table. You will not build a hash table in the open call
because those guys will enforces this a little bit that open calls or close calls, they don't touch data. Data is
only touched in the next call.  And again, as I wanted to explain, the look up here into the hash table finds all
the matches for Tupalina, but they're only returned one by one. So the mechanism that we have here. Any questions?
 All right, so, just, uh, not to overload, uh, with things what I'm gonna do here, is I'm actually gonna jump to,
since we spent some time on this score here, let's jump to outer joint. Okay? So, Actually.  Okay. So this is our
inner joint S, okay? What if I wanted to do an outer jar?  Okay. So let's say I want to do R. Left, outer joint.
 Yes. So left outer joint basically means that for a couple in R, If there is no match in S, I should return it with
a nurse. Okay.  Because the semantics of outer joint are that non-matching to pals are returned in the output. And
because non-matching tuples do not have the sort of the attributes from the other relation, you have to add nulls
there. Okay.  So, How would we modify this code to do the left outer drive? Does anyone want to take a stab at that?
It's self matches, is that the evening?  So if stuff matters is, um, where, where do I do that? I guess like I mean,
just next to either or above or a little bit not interesting. So the intuition is right, but it does, like, you have
to be a little bit specific about where you put the condition. again.  No. The the modification that we need here is
that the rest of it is fine. Every tuple that's returned here, we are going to return for the left outer zone as
well.  But in addition, if a tuple of R does not find any matches, we need to return that with nals. Okay. So this
is the place where we have to do that.  Okay. So if self-caught matters is empty, right here, because by this time
we have started talking, so we can't do it here. It has to be done here.  Here, right here, which is the 1st time
they look up for matches for specific people of art. If we don't find any matches, we'll return that couple
immediately with nulls. Okay.  There's obviously other ways to write the code, but that's one easy way to do that.
So this is what that code would look like. So this is the only modification I need to this pseudo code here to
handle left outer hash joint.  Remember, I mentioned last time that the actual code for these different variations
of joints is not separate operators, and that's because of this. is that the same rest of the logic remains. The
only change I need is if SoundGuard matches is empty, then I should go ahead and return that to Pal with nuts. And
this code actually handles the rest of it as well.  So next time you call it, send that matches, he's empty, so you
will go ahead and scan the next two. But of course, you have to be careful to make sure that you are not just
returning that people, but you can progress to the next people properly, but in this code, it works out. This
wouldn't necessarily be my way of writing this code, but you know, it works.  Questions. Is this clear? What we just
did here?  How do we handle right outer joint? So same code. Actually, let's go back to the previous score because I
shouldn't have that in the right after join.  What if I had the? Right outer drive. For a right after join, just to
remind you, it's other way out for S to pass that don't find a match, I need to return those to pass.  Now, you
might say, why don't we use the left auto giant and flip those two? But we wouldn't want, we don't want to
constraint the optimizer. That's effectively saying that the optimizer cannot use right out to join operator.  So
we're going to go ahead and implement a right oxygen operator. Remember, I started with the assumption that S is
smaller? Well, let's say I want to do R right out of your S, and S is actually the smaller relation, and R is much
larger.  Well now flipping doesn't work anymore. Because if R is much larger, I don't want to build a hash table on
R. So, I still want to build a hashtag on S. That's why I need the right option.  And also, I'm gonna have to
implement full outer joint. So either way, one way or other, I have to take care of the other side of this, this
joint. So who wants to tell me how to do right, how to join by modifying this code?  Again, what is my goal here,
right? Magolia is to find non-matching stuples. So how can I find non-natching vegetables?  Non-matching octopus is
easy because of the way the code is written. I take it to full of art, I look up, and immediately I know whether
there are any matching to pulse or not, right? I'm done.  Non-matching S to be like 2+ in S that don't match is a
harder problem because of the way we're doing this. Maybe he could go away of like S tools that have to imagine
things like we told them at the end afterwards. So the thing that we need to do is we need to track which of the S
to pulse have been matched. as we're executing this.  We know which, we know this festival match, whatever this
festival was that was from here, we know that matched. Okay. But the question is, which ones did not match?  Okay.
And so one way to do that, and again, this is not a particularly efficient way of doing it, but one way to do that,
um, Is, uh, I need a set with all vegetables here. Okay, not very efficient, we are doing it because I'm literally
doubling my memory right here.  But let's say for sake of explanation, we'll allow this. So we create a set of all S
to us. Every time we find the restable that match, we remove it.  Okay. And as a result of it, at the end of this
whole thing, I will have this particular set, it will only contain those two pulse that have not matched with any
article. Okay.  Now, in order to sort of deal with this, this code was a bit weird to modify without it becoming too
big. So the way I did it here is I have 2 phases. initially we're in phase one. In phase one, we are sort of doing
the normal joint processing while keeping track of the person that has not matched.  The moment we are exhausted
are, they switch to phase two. Okay. And in phase two, And in phase two, we go through the not-matched set and we
start returning them all down.  Okay. And again, remember, I cannot return them all at once. I still have to do my
next call.  So this is going to be like the next call. Okay. So, uh, uh, it will do phase one, once the phase one is
finished, Only if self-cat R is EOF, we move to phase 2, and then in phase 2, we start returning into Paswar Tawa.
 And since we're using a variable, actually, I should have said, got phasia. So phases are variable that I'm keeping
track of the state. And so it will keep returning the all the triples from S that have not matched one by one.  With
appropriate amount of nulls for the R parts. Okay. So this whole core, together, will have my full outer journey.
 That plus the inner inner modification that we made. And then. There will be a parameter that tells me which of the
4 joints I'm going.  Am I doing energy, outer joint, left outer joint, full out to join our right outer joint? And
the same code will handle all of them with just appropriate if conditions. If I'm doing the full outer joint or
right outer joint, this code gets activated.  If I'm doing left auto joint or full outra joint, this code gets
activated. If I'm not doing either of them, both of those codes are deactivated by if conditions. When I say
deactivate, I don't mean anything.  Fancy, I just mean, the wave condition that says only executive days if you are
doing left on to join. Any questions? Now, one thing that did surprise me last time was, Posge Scale does seem to
specifically note hash inner joint here, and it noted hash full joint here.  So I wasn't quite sure whether progress
cure has modified its code base since I last played with it a while ago, to actually have a, Um, So it does say hash
full joint there. So, I need to, I, I, I want to check whether that is just something it added while printing out
the output, or is it an actually separate operator? I don't think it's a separate operator, which doesn't really
make sense.  There's a lot of repeated code and for it to be a separate operator. But there might be some reasons
they did it. Okay.  But at least from what I remember 20 years ago, when I worked with Posgescu somewhat more
extensively, they did not have separate operators for full outer joints and insurance. But that might be the case
today. Any questions on this?  All right, so let's uh, we'll stop a few minutes early today. just to recap what
we're talking about today where selections, two, 3 different ways of doing selections, mainly 2 ways of doing
selections. The sequentials can. And index index scan.  Both of them are commonly used in databases. You will see it
in postvascular and most other databases that are similar. And then we saw a few different ways of doing joints.  So
we saw the nested loops joint, which really only gets used very infrequently. If the relations are really small, we
saw index nested loops joint, which is commonly used, and then we saw hash joint, which is the most commonly used
for post rescue, and also other databases. What we haven't seen so far is the sword based joint, so that we'll talk
about in the next class.  Okay. But before I stop, any questions on any of this? And just to remind you, the
material till this point is on the quiz for next week.  Okay. So I believe it's on Thursday and I still forgot to
check it. But then this is where whatever we cover in the next class, that's not on the quiz.  Any quick questions
before we stop? Have you done over scheduling the one? Sorry.  Not yet. I'll try to do that today tomorrow, okay?
We'll try to send that email out today.  All right, I'll see you on Tuesday.
