Okay, so if there are no questions, let's move on with the topics. So for the last couple of classes, we've started, we just been discussing query processing and optimization. Um, specifically query processing.  So we started with, um, We started with a discussion of query plans, how to read query plans, what a query plan is. We talked about pipelining versus metrialization. We talked about selections using indexes or without using indexes in the last class.  And then we talked about 2 different ways to do joints, hash joints, and listed loops joints, and variation, which is index nested, lip joint in the last class. Okay? We also talked about hash-based outer joints in the last class.  So now the sort of plan for today is to kind of wrap up on the query operator implementations. So we'll talk about sort merge joints and we'll talk about a few other operators, like aggregates, salting itself, set operations, and then we'll talk about what happens when you have a data set or relation that's larger than the amount of memory you have. Okay?  It's increasingly not an issue, but it's still useful to know how to handle that situation. It does sometimes come up when you're dealing with large databases. And then next class, we may or may not start with choreo optimization after the quiz, but let's say I haven't thought about what I want to do after the quiz in the next class.  But then the next topics are query optimizations, parallel execution, and then the last module, which is transactions. Any questions on any of this so far? All right.  So let's talk about salt merjoin. Now, where is sort my join? So, remember, we talked about the uh, sort of uh, um, hash join or nested loops join kind of an approach.  All of them effectively have a outer loop, and then there is an inner loop or inner code, which sort of depends on the specific technique. Right? So, it's not the right way to look at it.  You know. So something like this, right? We go through one to path of I, and then for every 2 path, we look up, and then we do a scan on S. We look up an index on us, or we look up into a hashtable on S. Okay.  So those are kind of three alternatives that we talked about last time, which kind of have this outer room, which goes over the vehicle person, one relation, and then for each of that to come, it looks to find the matches in the 2nd relation. Okay? in one of two, 3 different ways.  Sort my joint doesn't, uh, is a little bit different because it's more of a, it's a more symmetric operation. Okay. Now, part of the reason I cover this quickly is because you should already be familiar with how to do sorting, okay?  Using the merge song. So salt merge joint is basically merge salt. Okay, but you're doing a merge sort on 2 relations simultaneously.  The precondition for the sotmas joint is that the relation must be sorted. If they are not sorted, you need a step before that to sort them. So, but for now, we are going to assume that the relations are sorted.  Okay? I mean, most database systems, the sort and the merge are 2 separate operators. Because salting is very widely used, sorting gets used for aggregations, for duplicate, elimination, for set operations.  It gets used for everything. So we have sorting as a separate operator and then merge, join as a separate operator. Um, the merge on is pretty straightforward.  Once the relations are sorted, we effectively go down both of those relations in lockstep. Right? Because they are sorted on the joint attribute, as we're going down them, all the matches are kind of right there.  Okay. So here's the, so we have 2 screens. We are doing a sorting the join here on our tribute A1, which conveniently is the 1st attribute in both of these relations.  Both of them are sorted. Note one key thing here is that there is a duplicate here. There is no reason why there cannot be a duplicate on the join attribute.  So in this case, we are showing one duplicate on the joint attribute. And that does, when you have duplicates on both sides, there is some extra logic that's required to handle that. It's not complicated, but it does, like, the code looks a little more complex.  So the way we're going to do it is we'll start at the top of both of these relations. And in this case, we notice that these 2 tuples are both A. Both have A1 equal to A, which means they join. So we can immediately produce one output, the output is A, 3, capital A. Okay.  Because our goal is to find matching two pulse, and these two two pulse match. these 2 matches with this. And so we can go ahead and produce that output immediately, A3A. Okay. First step, okay with everyone?  Any questions on that? Now, at this point, um, we have to sort of move down, okay? So in this case, typically there is slight asymmetry in that we decide that we going to move down this list first.  So we'll go from this point to this pointer. So we go to the next tupel. BG.  Now, this B here does not match A. Okay, which means that now, for this A-tuple, we have no more matches. We are done. Because if there were any more matches, there will all be right here in the top, since the situation is sorted by even all matching attributes, all to pursue value A will be at the top.  So once we saw a B, we know there is no more A now. So we can go ahead and move this pointer to here. So we switch this, and move it here.  Now, at this point, we can compare this and this and see that, oh, both of them do have the same B. We can go ahead and output B one G. Okay. And then, once that is done, we move to the next one here. CM.  Once again, we see that C and B here do not match, so I can move that pointer down. Now I'm here. So let me, erase the ink now.  With a link. So now this pointer is here, and this pointer is here. So far, I have produced two outputs.  I have produced A3A and produced B1G. Now, when I compare this to, I see that here I have a sea and here I have a D, which means that this relation, like this to CL is not going to find a match here at all. So I go ahead and move this down. So at this point, which one I moved on, kind of depends on the comparison between this CLD.  Because this is smaller than D. I have no chance of finding any matches for this. I could still find a match for this. Okay.  So I moved this pointer down. And that pointer goes to DN. And then I can produce D, A, N, and so on.  Okay. So if you remember, sort, merge, or merge, sort, this acts exactly like merge sort. Except that in a mud sort, I'm sort of sorting the same relation or same set of to pulse, let's say. or same set of objects.  And I'm sorting in a single set here, I'm doing this across 2 separate relations. But the key step here is basically the same. In a mud sort, also, I would have 2 sets that I'm merging or 2, sorry, sequences that I'm merging, and the merge operation looks exactly the same.  Almost no difference between the two. Like, there is some differences, because we are producing joint results, while it's pretty minimal. Okay The place where it gets a little complicated is that, you know, at the beginning, I said that we started A3, VC AA, the producer output, then we moved this down.  We saw a B, okay? So going back to that 1st step, oops, not erase, irresolink. So initially I start with, I start with these 2 I produce the 1st one and the 1st one here.  Then I moved this down. Okay. So at this point, these and these do not match.  So I can sort of, what I said at that point is that remove this pointer down, which is true. We do move this pointer down. But if there is an A here, I can't need to go back to the top again.  So there's a little bit of extra logic required to handle the case. sort of the case when the joint attributes are not unique, that there are duplicates. A little bit more logic required, but it's, again, pretty relatively straightforward. And again, if you are unsure about this one still, I recommend go back and review your notes on, uh, uh, sword mush, uh, which should have been covered in a 250 or something.  I'm not sure which one covers it. And you will see that these steps here are basically the same. Questions.  The benefits of Sortma join are, uh, the biggest benefit of our hash joint is that it requires a lot less memory. I only need to keep sort of the, this part here in memory. Whereas with a hash joint, I have to build an entire hash table in memory, on one relation.  If that relation is large, if both of the relations are large, that hash table can be pretty big. Whereas in a sort, merge joint, I don't need to keep that much. I don't need that much memory.  If the relations are sorted, then the sort must join is very fast. It's requires BR plus BS block transfers. BR is the number of blocks of R.  BS is a number of blocks of S. And so that's as fast as you can get. If both the relations are sorted. If they are not sorted, then you kind of need to figure out the ad in the salting cost, which we'll talk about briefly. in a minute.  Okay. Uh, In practice, what you find is that the comparison between hash join and sort my join is really like, there have been a series of papers written over the last 20 papers. Each one sort of coming to a different conclusion on sort versus hash.  I cover this in the graduate class. I used to cover it a little bit in the graduate class. There was a paper in ninth age saying hashing is generally superior. paper in 2000 saying, on the newer hardware, hashing is, sorting is better.  Another paper saying, no, if you just do it this way, hashing is better. other people saying, well, maybe if you do it this way, sorting is better. So sorting and hashing kind of have gone back and forth, and fundamentally you can choose either one of them right now if you were to build a new system. For large memory systems, hashing seems to be generally superior.  It has better constants. Okay. The overall cost is very comparable, but the constants for hashing seem to be slightly better.  But there is just so much nuance in, beyond a point, there is too much nuance in there. It depends on the exact implementation and hardware, hardware itself. So for all practical purposes, hash joints and sort mush joints, including the sorting cost, can be treated as being equivalent.  They have very similar performance characteristics. They are both very good. One key thing to note here, which is an interesting one, is that, um, if I do a sotmers join of these 2 relations, the result is going to be sorted on A1.  The join attribute. And let's say if I were to do a duplicate elimination after that, the fact that the result is already sorted on even can make a duplicate elimination a lot faster. So because of that, uh, earlier systems preferred, uh, sort must join because they could exploit that to speed up, not the join, but the operator after that.  And I'm pretty sure Post Rescue also still exploits this. So to quickly summarize, um, joints. So we talked about Nested Loops joint first.  It's a simplest 2 4 loops join algorithm. is always applicable. Then we talked about index nested loops join, uh, which only applies if uh, if we have an uh, index on the join attribute. We talked about has joined, um, which, uh, only works for equity joints, uh, whereas other other journal algorithms can be used for uh, even for conditions like this.  And then we talked about sotma's joints, and, you know, as I just kind of said, a couple of times, hi, Jonathan sotma joints are very comparable to each other. And the choice between them tends to come down to minor implementation details. Um, we talked about doing uh, outer joints using hash tables, but there is this algorithm to do outer joints using salt merge, or index nested loops and so on.  Or not maybe not the index index one is trickier. But doing sartmer joint, adding outer joints to it is not that difficult. For instance, and I won't go through the details of it, but here, for instance, when I noticed that CL does not have a match because I'm here and here and CND don't match.  At that point, I know that CL does not have a match and I can produce the outer tupel for it. Okay The outer joint to pull for it. So with null CL.  I can produce that similarly, when I come to F7, I jump from D to M. I know that F7 does not have a match. So if I'm doing a left outer joint, at that point the F7 can be output with the nulls. So it's relatively simple modifications to take the basic sortma journal algorithm and add the left or right or both outer joints to it.  Outer gens are a little trickier with um, With nested and index nested, uh, left outer joint will be straightforward. The right outer joint would be a little bit trickier. Because, again, with index nested loops join, if you go down here, to the index algorithm.  And if I'm doing a left outer joint, I'm doing it R, left outer joint, S, at this point, if a 2% R does not find a match, S, I can output that with nulls. But finding tuples in S, that did not have a match in R, is going to be a lot trickier. So I would probably never use index nested loops joint to do a right outer joint.  But I could do a left out to join pretty like it's pretty straightforward. All right, any questions before we continue with the next topic will be group aggregates? So any questions before we get to that?  Okay. Uh... Goodbye.  So ignore this. I'll just show you the pseudo code for this. The query we look at 1st is this one.  Select A, count B from our goodbye A. Okay? And again, remember the semantics of this? What we want to do is we want to take R, we want to group it, group the truples of R by A, and then we want to count the number of 2% each group.  Okay. So this is what the algorithm for the pseudo code for this would look like. What we are going to do is we're going to keep a hash table.  So this hash base, so we're going to create a hash table. Yeah, I thought I had an... okay. I don't have an example.  Um.. So, the idea behind the group by Hashing is that we're going to use the hash table to sort of keep track of the result of the group by along the way while we're processing it. Okay?  It's actually easiest shown using an example. Let me see if I can do that. Um, so, for instance, imagine that I have a, uh, so this is the value of A, And this is a value of B. Okay.  Um... Give me one second. So we're trying to do... select... a comma, come B... from R...  Okay. All right, we will do it this way. Okay.  Uh, let me know if you can't read it. I can try to make it slightly bigger. So, that's the query I want to do.  Select Acom account B. Okay. And then I have from R, and then I'm doing a group by A. Okay? And that's my some example to palsah.  So I'm going to be creating a hash table. Okay. Now, one way to do this is remember the goal of the grouping, uh, sort of the definition of group is to group them to pals, right?  So let's go ahead and like one option is to just group the tuples. Let's say the hashtable is initially empty. I look at the 1st stupel, which is one b1.  And in the hash table, I add, um, So, at this point, my hash table looks like key is one, and I'm going to have one tuple in it. Okay, so I'll create a list, one comma viewer. So, after the first stupel, my hash table will contain, uh, The key is one, the list in the hash table is the list of tuples with that value of A. Okay, make sense?  Then, I'm not gonna keep writing this, so, 2nd Tupper, uh, or maybe I, yeah, so, 2nd Tuppal. Now I have a 2nd to pull with the 2nd key. So I'll go ahead and add that to me.  Then, 3rd to Pal, Third to Pal is the same value of A, so I'm going to go ahead and add it here. Okay. Fourth to pal.  It's a new value now. Not that I'm doing this as sort of a list here, but there's basically a hashtable. Okay?  So the left side here is the key, and this is the value. Makes sense to everyone? Any questions on what we're doing here?  So all I'm doing is I'm using the hash table to create a grouping. When I see a new topal, let's say one B4, I take the value of A, and I look up in the hash table to see if there is already a list for it. If there is a list, I go ahead and append to that list.  If there is no list, I create a new list and add it. Okay. So pretty straightforward hashtable.  At the end of this, So 5th to Pal gives me another value here. And then sixth to pal. Gives me another way.  Okay. Once I'm done, once I'm done with the with all the 2 pulse, I can go through this harsh table, and for every key, all I have to do is output the count. And I'm done.  My output is going to be one, three, two, two, three, one. So at this point, once this is done here, At the end, go through the hash table, output, one, three, two, two, three, one. So value of A, followed by the count.  Makes sense? Any questions? On what we did here?  Do I really need to keep these entire groups around? Could I simplify that? Just a list of bees, okay?  That would certainly reduce the storage, but can I do even better than that? Just account? Okay.  There is really no reason, if my goal, final goal is to compute the count, that I actually need this, right? I can instead simply store one comma, two. Two, one.  Three, como, one. So I can just keep a running count for each group. What other aggregates could I do this way?  By just keeping running something? Some, yeah. So this is count.  I could do some. We went plus B2. What else?  There's lots of other aggregates we have, you know. We have average, we have max, we have men, we have median, we have more standard deviation. Ah, I would say the coverage, man, max could help me done.  How would you do average? I can't keep a running average. So Max and Min I can do, okay?  At all times, I can simply maintain max equal to max of Biwan, B2. I could do mint. Minov, Biwan, Kamabi, 2.  What? What else? So I'd be, like, the software.  Some money? So, for average, we can't, we can't keep track of running average, but we can keep track of the running count and some. So I need 2 values per hash entry, but I don't need to keep the whole list. 2 values is enough.  Okay. What else? I could do a standard deviation also, if you're comfortable with the formulas for standard deviation, even though the main formula looks complicated, there is a transformed formula which can actually be done in a running count way.  You can have to keep track of the sum, and you have to sum up, so the standard division formula requires you to do a, so if I'm doing a standard division of X1 X2 X3, I have to keep track of X1 plus X2 plus X3, as well as X1 squared plus X2 square plus X3 squared. So as long as I keep those 2, along with the count, I can do standard deviation also. What about, what about this one?  There's a common query for us. Count distinctly. How would I do that?  So we know how to do some, count, max, min, average. Let's talk about a few others. What about count distinct B?  Anyone? This can be... So I have to keep the distinct values.  Not every value, but I have to keep the distinct values of B. So there isn't really much getting around, keeping a list of uh, B1, B2. Okay. And as I'm getting new values of B with the same value of A, I keep adding them, there's a set, not a list.  I can maintain it as a set, and I can keep adding to this, and the set will, obviously, Python set is not going to be a good implementation for this in practice, but if I'm just having pseudo code, I can just use Python set for this, and I can keep adding to the set. Ultimately, the size of the set will give me count distinct B. Same is true for medium. Not distinct part.  I have to just keep a list of all the bees if I want to compute the median B. And same is true for mode. There exist some optimizations for things like median and mold. But fundamentally, you know, the simplest way to do it would just be to keep the entire thing out.  In fact, for something like a media, a sorting-based approach is much better. Okay, because for median, what I can do is, I can 1st sort this. It's all, again, sort.  Yeah, it did sort. But I have to sort within each one as well. And then, kind of, once it's sorted, I can kind of find the median more quickly.  But if I were to use hashing for it, I'll have to keep the entire list around. Like I'm doing here. Media and mode will both be like that and what else?  I guess those are the standard, standard aggregate operations. Okay. So as much as possible, we'd like to do them in this way.  But in some cases, I have to maintain more information. Okay. In a system like postersQL, the aggregate code is actually, um, It's kind of a one operator, one more implementation with if cases, with sort of case case statement to handle different aggregates.  Okay. But I do think, I don't remember, I haven't looked at that. I don't get implementation and postgrad skills closely, but it's possible that things like media are handled in a different code altogether.  But suddenly for count, some min max average, it has the same code. Which is if conditions to change what is maintained. In fact, it's not even if conditions, it sort of, it overloads some functions to do that.  So, that is this code here. Okay. We create the hash table in the open cloud, call.  What are they, groups? I don't like Chinese groups here. not. All right, I need it because...  So if the groups are not, again, one of the challenges with the iterated implementation is this requirement that you produce one um, one people at a time. So this code is using the fact that self-god groups is none to do the 1st initial building of the hashtable. So what you see is that in the open call, we create the vegetable, but we don't actually bail it, we just create the data structure.  Groups is set to learn. In the 1st cause, when the group says none, it goes through the entire relation R and creates the hash table. Note that this hashtable, this code is designed for count, so it's doing this self-dotage.get 0 +one.  Then, once the hash table is built out and we have this, all the interest populated, we get the entries and then start returning returning the 2 pulse one that one. And so that's, that's kind of it. Pretty straight for our code.  I think the indentation here is... If sender group says none, read R and read your hashtable, populate self.groups, and after that, simply pop the 2+ one at a time. And the end result of this code here is that after I'm done with the entire relations scanning, it's of R.A is exactly equal to the count that I'm looking for.  Any questions on this code? Some will just require changing the code to do us plus r.b. Main, will require it to do a main maximum required to do max, or that.  Average requires to compute sum and count. Uh, the, the code slightly changes. I was trying to get this code to fit in the slide so the code looks somewhat weird in some places, but, you know, you know the idea.  The idea is to keep the sum and the count in the harsh table. And in the end, I can't just pop the things from the hashtable directly. I have to actually compute the average.  Same goes for median. In media, I'll collect all the values, and at the very end, I'll compute the median before returning it as a, as a, as a tuple to the calling operator. Any questions?  All right. Um, you can also use uh, uh, salting for doing aggregation. It's relatively straightforward.  We sort the relation by A, and then once I sort it by A, as we saw here, What did I do? As we saw here, Once I thought by A, all the tuples in the same group are contiguous. So I can kind of read the group and do whatever grouping competition I need to do.  Okay. Um, and so it's really, the code itself is pretty. I don't have the code on the slides, but you know, it's relatively sort of just goes to the sorted tuples and just computes the results one by one.  Sorting is better for aggregation. If I'm starting from scratch, the sorting implementation is cleaner than hashing implementation. We talked about outer joints.  Oh, the slide just in here. Okay. We'll briefly go through a few other operators.  One is duplicate elimination. Duplicate elimination is very, I need to, let's say, do select distinct A. You can use hashing for this, but sorting is easier. So if you saw the relation, all the duplicates are going to be next to each other.  And so you can just throw them away. So this is assuming that I'm doing a distinct on the entire relation. So, I saw the relation, read the 2 person sorted order, and for each 2PA, I basically compare it to the previous tupel.  And if the 2 tuples are identical, then I throw this to Palaway. I don't output it. But if the tuple I'm currently reading is different from the previous tuple, I output it.  Okay. So, which means that if there are duplicate tuples, only the 1st tuple will be output and the 2nd will not be out. So, and that's pretty much it.  This is the pseudo code for salting-based duplicate elimination looks like this. And again, there is a hashing version of it, which just builds a hash table and uses the hash table to sort of find duplicates. Okay.  In a hash table, you know, if I add the same 2 per 2nd time, it will collide and I will know that there is a duplicate. Any questions? Um, set operations.  I only have one slide on it because set operations are relatively straightforward. Union, if you remember, let's talk about union all first. Union all preserves all the duplicates.  This is the simplest operator because I literally output all the parts of R, followed by all Tuples of S. Union oil does not require me to do anything. Just output everything, output all of our, output all of us. The problem with union intersect is that they require you to remove duplicates.  So their implementations do require some work. So in order to do union, one option is to go ahead and append to pulse of RNS together and just do a duplicate elimination over the entire set of tuples. So in other words, I feed all of art, followed by all of S into, into, um, into a duplicate elimination operator.  Okay. I'm actually, so I'm just curious what plan post rescue generates for this. Let me see if I can quickly fire up PG admin.  Okay. There it is. Um...  So I have PCI, man. Uh, let's see. Select into I one.  Here, table I1 as select star from instructor. I think this is fine. Okay.  Just playing... Select star from I one, and, uh... Yeah, so, okay, so you can see the plan that it generated.  It did use a hash aggregate for some reason. But what it did is, it has an upend operator that simply combines all of Ivan and all of I2. And then it uses a hash-paced aggregate to do a duplicate elimination.  Note that even, there is no aggregate in this query. This query is a union query. No aggregate, no group I, but it's still used hash aggregate.  That's because again, the distinction between physical and logical operators. Logically we are doing a duplicated elimination. So physically, the operator is an aggregate, hash aggregate operator.  Okay. So we are using a hash-based, uh, duplicate elimination after, um, appending INNI2. You could also use sword based, but it chose to use hash based because the relation sizes are small.  If I had large relations, which this table doesn't really have, I would use probably use sorting. I could try connecting to Any questions, by the way, and what I just did here? I have, I slack, this is slack.  Kind of a large table, if I remember correctly. Dude. Um...  So union requires us to do duplicate elimination because that's a semantics of union. So, the logical of it, so, 1st of all, the union here is split into a pen, like combined the 2 to per relations, followed by duplicate elimination. That's the query plan.  Okay? Like if I were to do a logical query plan for it, that would be the query plan I would do. And append followed by a duplicate elimination.  But in postgrass QL, the duplicate elimination is implemented either as a sort-based method or a hash-based method. Okay. So we're using the hash place method.  Now, it turns out the way you do to play it elimination is by building this kind of hash table that we saw on the, that we, the example that we worked out, right? Something like this. Like this kind of a hash table.  We're going to use something like this to do the duplicate elimination. But that's also what I'm using for aggregates. So post-grad scale does have a single hash, aggregate operator that can handle both aggregations as well as duplicated elimination.  And so it overloads that physical operator. Okay. So 2 separate logical operators and aggregate operator as well as a union operator are both getting mapped or not union, duplicate elimination operator are both getting mapped to the same physical operator.  In the code, when as a physical, I mean, the operators has implemented in the code. Like postgrad school, score base, as do most databases, have a form of operator, like in Python, I would have a class operator, and then every other operator subclasses that. So the names you see are those subclass names.  And so they have a hash agreement. And there's also salt aggregate, which I could probably get it to pop up if I used large enough tables. But these tables are too small, so it prefers to use hashing.  The in memory cost more, the cost model that postcode scale has, from my experience, seems to prefer hashing if the relations are small enough. Any other questions? And this?  Intersection is similar to joints. Intersection, in fact, is exactly joined. When you say intersect, you are effectively trying to say, do a natural joint between R and S on all attributes.  And so that's why intersect all and intersect are both implemented using join algorithms. So if I were to, going back to postgrad scale, code, If I went to try to do this as an intersect instead, Try to find out. You should see no guarantees, but we should see a joint operator pop up.  Okay, so, no, really. It used something called a hash set of intersect. I have no idea why it used that, but, you know, it decided to use a different operator.  I wonder if I do intersect all the religions to join. No, still using. So it looks like for intersect.  I don't know why I didn't use that for union then. In any case, uh, looks like Posketskill has a different operator planner intersect. But, you know, the standard implementation for intersect look very similar to joints.  So the same operator can be used for both of them. I said yes, but actually, I don't know. Let me just try the...  Oh yeah, there it is. Any other questions on this? That is the only slide we had on set operations, so, uh, any questions?  Um, if not, we can move on to the last topic that we wanted to discuss here, which is how to handle external, like how to handle the situation when relations are larger than the memory that you have. So, let's get into that. We'll talk about hash join 1st and then we'll talk about sorting.  And one thing I'll note here is that even though we talk about this in the context of memory being smaller than the relation sizes, the same techniques show up in a distributed setting. Very similar ideas show up when I'm trying to do a hash joint. in a data center across a bunch of machines. So we'll see, we'll see that sort of in a couple of classes from now.  The original hash joint that we saw looked something like this. We need SM memory, and we build a hash table on it. And then for every triple in R, we go through this hash index.  We cannot look into the hash index to find matching pupils. Now, the problem is, what if S is too big? What if S is bigger than the amount of memory I have available?  So US is too big. What I'm gonna do is I'm going to split S into pieces. I'm also going to split R into pieces.  Okay. So, here's, in fact, since this seemed to work out pretty well, let me try this here. So, let's say R is a, a, B. Um...  And so on. And then I have S. So, I'm trying to do a joint on, uh, uh, RNS on, uh, on, um, B. Okay? Now, imagine that S is too big to fit in memory.  Like, obviously, I can't write that out here, but just imagine that there's too many to pulse in it. Okay. The in memory version of it is that the simple version is that I build a hash index, hashtable, all of S. The partitioning version of it is, I 1st partition S into pieces, and then I build a hash table on each one of them separately.  So what does that mean? Let's say I know that the B values are, you know, in a range from one to 2000. So B one to B thousand.  So what I can do is I can create a partition of S, which is values of B, or partition of S, where B is B is less than B 500, and S2 is a partition of S, where B is more than B 500. So I create two partitions of S, okay? And I decided exactly how these are created and also created using hashing.  But for now, let's focus on the partitioning part and not how they're created. I'm going to create 2 partitions of S into S1 and S2. And let's hope, and the Pakistans will be created, such that each partition is small enough to fit in memory.  So maybe I have like a 10 partitions, right? Um, B, 501, less than B, less than B, Thug. Partition of S, where...  And it's for... Something like that. Okay?  Make sense? So I create four partitions of S, with the hope, not with the hope, but with the plan that each one of them fits in memory. Now, I also want to create the partitions of R. in the same way.  Because they have to match. So I'm creating partitions of S based on the values of B. I'm creating some partisans of R based on the values of B. But the way I would do this partitioning would be to ensure that all of S1, S2, S3, each one of them individually fits in memory. And then I sort of do the joint.  Join steps. Now join will be done using a hash joy, read S1 in memory, and build a hash table on it. Go through R1 and use the hashtable to find matches.  And this will be a two, a two... That's three, or three. Okay.  So, once I've created the partitions, I'm going to join them, pairwise, S1R1, S2R2, S3R3, S4R4. And each one of them, I will use a harsh joint for. But because when I created this partition, I ensured that each of S1S2S3S4 fits in memory, now I don't have the larger than memory problem.  So all of the S itself is too large to fit in memory, but as soon as 2 S3S4, they are not too large to fit in memory. Each one of them can fit in memory. Of course, the key thing here is that because I did this practicing on beat, I'm guaranteed that Esper and Arvan have matching two pers, but I never have a match between a couple here and a couple in R4.  Because the B weather, the joint is on B, and the B values of S1 and R4 are disjoint, which means that there is no possibility that a triple from S1 matches with a triple from R4. I only have to look at S1R1, S2R2, S3R3, and S4R4. Another way to sort of write this is that is to SJR... is equal to S1 joint, R1, union, S2, join, R2, and so on.  Any questions? So the slides, the do show this, but without the full example, um... Okay.  So, the rest of previous part was all just a text description of this, where R, we created 5 partitions of R. We created 5 partitions of S, and then we do a pairwise join between those partitions and that gets us the full results. The partitions are created in a step before the joint start.  So we go through, 1st of all, we have to decide on the partitioning strategy, like I mentioned, less than B 500, then B 500 to be 1000 and so on. That has to be decided up priority. Once that is decided, I go through S and I cannot create this partitions, sort of, I'll just write out to disk.  The partitions are all written out to disk, so this is an expensive algorithm in that sense, because everything is getting written out to disk. But, you know, I mean, we have a constraint. We have 2 little memory, so we don't really have a choice.  So the cost of this algorithm can be high, which is why you won't really see it getting used in most systems today, just because the memories are too large today. And because the memories are so large, you rarely need to use these techniques. If we do end up in this situation, sorting is more efficient than doing this.  We would typically use hashing for this purpose. The example that I gave, I use ranges, but we would typically use hashing for this purpose. So we would use a hash function to split S into 5 partitions.  The same hash function will be used to split R into 5 partitions. Okay. The range base is easier to explain.  So that's why I used it, but the implementations will actually use hashing for that. So we typically need 2 hash tables, one or 2 hash functions, one hash function to partition them, and then the 2nd hash function to actually build the hash table on three. So this hash-based external memory algorithm requires 2 hash tables.  A 2 hash functions. So, essentially, what this is, is, is hashing. So they've got partitions and have another rations are joining.  Correct. When you say, like, each part goes to ash functions, you said, like, any good... So what I mean is that like this 1st partition into 5 partitions, I use a hash function for that.  Okay. And then inside the hash table itself, I need a 2nd hash function. Okay, that's going to be a, like the, that's about the implementation of the hash table itself, but hashtable uses a hash function internally to create the buckets.  Okay. That's a 2nd harsh one show. When I'm building the, when I'm writing postcode skill itself, I can't rely on libraries of these hash functions.  I'm writing my own hash functions. I'm writing my own hash tables. So that's why I need I need to actually deal with 2 hash functions.  The main question that you need to sort of worry about, for instance, is that how do you guarantee that the partitions of S all fit in memory? So, for instance, if uh, if SS 10,000 blocks and I only have 100 blocks of memory, if I try to use a hash function that uh, uh, sort of exactly has us into 100 different values, that's not gonna work out very well. Because hash functions do not do uniform distribution.  There is some variants in them. So I kind of have to add a factor to it to allow for some variations across the bucket sizes. So these are all considerations that I have to deal with in the actual implementation.  These are the kinds of things that complicate the implementation in an actual system. Being dealing with a bad hash function, right? I picked a hash function, turns out that hash function, I was careful, it's just really bad.  Okay. For my data set. So I kind of need to figure out some way around it.  We'll see this basic idea again in a distributed setting. When we talk about parallel architectures like how Apaches Park does it, Apaches Park does joints in this way, but it's creating these partitions for different machines. Each partition goes to a different machine.  And a lot of big performance, high performance data systems use hashing to kind of do things like joints across a whole bunch of machines. We'll talk about this when we talk about paddle archives later. Any other questions?  Sort of the last thing that we're going to talk about today, and in this part is sorting. And including both normal sorting as well as the external sorting. Sorting is a very common basis for many operations.  Joints, duplicate elimination, aggregates, just the query itself may have sending or descending. So we need salting. Okay, salting is essential for us.  If the relation is small enough, We can just go ahead and do our standard sort. Okay, and C, QSort, implementation used to be the best at one point. I don't know if that's still the true, but the standard UNIX provided, or the standard library provided Q-Sort was actually pretty good.  Like did really well. Quick thought has a bunch of really, really nice properties. I assume you are familiar with quick salt.  But in fact, in sort of implementations, even though all of these different sorting algorithms have the same, as in asymptotic complexity, Quixot is the one that ends up being the most efficient in practice. Okay. And so if the relation is small enough, and you need to do salting, just use Q sort.  You are done. The relation is too large to fit in memory, which is not uncommon. We do something similar to what we just did with hashim.  What we do, for instance, like in this one, in fact, because I used ranges here, Because I use the ranges here, like forget this part. And let's say my, um, S is too large and we need to sort it. Well, we do exactly this.  We read S, we don't salt it, we just create partitions of it. The partitions are unsorted. Okay.  So when we are creating the partitions, uh, there's one way to do it. There's multiple ways to do it, but there's one way to do it. We can create these partitions of S, And write them out to disk all of them because they're too large to fit in memory at the same time.  So we create them, but we ride them out to disk, and then we read S1 and we sort it. And we write it back. Then we read S2, we write it back and so on.  It's a very simple way to take the same idea and, and, um, use, use it for the case when S is too large. Okay. That's actually not the standard algorithm, the standard algorithm is slightly different.  So this is option one. Option one. The option 2 is Read as much of S in memory as possible.  QSort. Right out to disk as S1. Then you keep doing this.  So, effectively, what, let me move this up. Effectively, what I doing is our goal is to sort S, we read as much of S as we can in memory. Okay, we sort it and we write it back to disk.  Then we read the next chunk. Sort it right in back to disk. Okay.  So in the end of this, I have now, after this are done, I have 4 sorted lists of 2 pulse on disk. And at this point I can merge them. Using the same algorithm, we talked about earlier for merge joint, very similar algorithm.  I can use it to merge. Merge S1S2S3S4. So, again, assuming you remember my thought, if you don't go back and review that, this is much thought.  Merging S1S2S3S4 is basically merge sort. In a merge sort, I only merged 2 things at a time. Here I'm merging a larger number of things, but the basic algorithm is the same.  And I'm done. As long as the amount of memories sufficiently large compared to us, it needs to have a square root relationship. So if S is a 1000000 blocks, as long as I have 1000 blocks of memory, I can I can do this.  And because of that square relationship, it's very unlikely you will ever need to do sort of a, like another step of this. So this is what's discussed in the slides here. Let M denote the memory size.  In phase one, we read the first M blocks, sort and write to disk, then read next M blocks. At the end of it, we have N sorted runs of size M blocks each, and then we do an NY merge, and we are done. So this is algorithm that actually does get implemented.  If I were to build a modern system right now and if I needed to handle a situation where the relation sizes are larger than memory, I would do this, but I would not implement the hash joint in the external hash joint way. That's too much work. One of them is enough and it's a rare enough case.  This is better than the highest joint version of it. And this kind of shows pictorially an example of this. You have the initial relation, it's too large to fit in memory.  Our memory is 3 to pulse here. So I create sorted runs. First, I saw the 1st 3 to pulse, GAD.  They get sorted. I saw the next three to pulse next to pulse. Don't have enough memory to actually merge all 4 of them simultaneously.  So I watched these two. I merged these two, and then I merged these two to get the final result. Okay.  So this has one more step, but in general, I would not need 2 steps, one step will be enough. Um, that was the last line I had on this uh, on this topic of uh, operator implementations. Any questions at all on any of this?  Because our next topic is quite optimization. which we will start most likely in next class or the class after that. Any questions or any of these, or in general? All right, in that case, let's stop a few minutes early, and I'll see you for quiz 3 on Thursday. 
