All right, let us get started. So, before we sort of continue with the topic, any questions
about anything? Any of the logistic issues? Yes. So, I did post the list of topics yesterday
include stuff that we are going to cover today. Any other questions? All right. So, what we
started discussing in the last class was what may be called storage representation, which
is the kind of trying to ask the question of how do we map tuples to blocks? At the
logical level, we have tuples. Tuples is what we work with, we write queries against. But
at some point, those tuples have to be stored on disk or on SSD. When I use the word disk,
I mean SSD or hard disk or some other storage mechanism that you might have. But at some
point, all of that data needs to be on the disks in order for us to keep using it. And
that is the question that we are asking. How does that actually work? And there are quite
a few variations of it. And this ends up being much more important than you might think
if your goal is to get the most performance out of the system. That is part of the reason
why systems like PostgreSQL are fundamentally limited in exploiting the modern hardware.
Those systems were built 30 years ago. They are not designed for the modern hardware.
In fact, PostgreSQL in particular used to be a single threaded system. It could not
even use multiple threads. I believe that has changed, but I am not sure exactly to
what extent that has changed. Whereas the modern systems like DuckDB is one of the most
popular systems right now. It is a completely new system built from scratch designed to
exploit the modern hardware. There are issues that we are not going to talk about like vectorization,
compilation and stuff like that. But DuckDB does all of them to get the most performance
out of the hardware. But even some simpler things like how you lay out the tuples on
disks and different ways to do it can have a significant impact on performance. And that
is kind of what we are talking about right now.
One question that we sort of skipped over last time was whether we want to use the operating
system file system or not. Hopefully the question here is clear, but let me know and I can elaborate.
In the older days, when people were building the most high performance database systems,
they actually bypassed the operating system and directly used the disk. Because the operating
system caused a lot of problems for them. Today it is much less common. Today with the
levels of abstraction we have and even with cloud computing and so on, it is really not
viable for the database systems to directly use the disks. So they end up using the file
system. And that has significant implications. So the two options here are basically to use
the operating system file system. Like if I am running this on Mac, I use the operating
system file system. The standard way databases do this is they allocate a large file on disk.
So they start with maybe a gigabyte sized file. You can control this parameter for PostgreSQL.
And it allocates a large file on disk and then sort of manages the blocks within that
file. Literally like a file is a list of bytes basically. You allocate it, zero it out to
begin with and then manage your data within that. PostgreSQL makes an assumption that
this file is contiguous on disk, which it does not have to be. Operating system might
fragment it. But that is the assumption that PostgreSQL makes.
So the problem, the major con with this approach is that the database system does not really
have control over physical placement. And that is something that you give up when you
use a file system that already exists. Make sense? Any questions on this? Can I briefly
discuss this already? All right. The other one is DBMS directly works with the disks
or uses its own operating system. This was really common at one point, but less and less
common today. But even today, the really high performance database systems probably
do something like this. They just bypass the operating system. One thing that has happened
which has been nice is that the operating system has become much more efficient and
it has provided more knobs to programs running on top of it, which makes it a little bit
less of an issue that you do not have control over what is going on. Any questions?
One thing that we will talk about a bit later on, which is a bigger problem, is that database
systems actually need to control when things move to disk. Remember when we talked about
the memory and disks and we said the data has to move back and forth between them? The
operating system handles that. The problem is the database system actually needs guarantees
on the order in which it is written. We will talk about this later. But without those guarantees,
the database system cannot guarantee transactions. The asset property is that the database system
is supposed to guarantee. It requires the database to have control over how the data
moves back and forth, in particular when the data moves back to disk. If it does not have
that control, then it cannot provide those guarantees. We will discuss this in more detail
when we talk about transactions.
Assuming that we are doing it through a file system, as I mentioned, PostgreSQL, for instance,
allocates a large single file on disk and then sort of manages data within them. You
can also do a different file per relation. SQLite does it. SQLite basically stores each
relation as a separate file. I think MySQL also does it. Any high performance system
is going to do something like this. Allocate a large file on disk and zero it out to begin
with, let us say, and then manage data within that. Your file could end up looking something
like this. This is a very simplified version, but your file could end up looking like this.
This is your entire file that you pre-allocated. Then many of these blocks might be empty to
begin with. Then you start placing your data into them. New tuples are inserted in instructors.
They go here. New tuples are inserted in students. They go here. Updates to instructor also cause
updates to this B plus tree, and so on. That is all of this. Any questions? All right.
We talked about fixed length records. We talked about slotted page structure. This is where
we ended last time, was the cache-optimized structure. Any questions on any of this material?
Anything that would be helpful to go in more detail?
I posted the homeworks. That is the best guidance I can provide on that right now.
There were questions on packs in the previous homeworks. This takes care of within a block.
When tuples are mapped to a single block in whatever mechanism you do, then the two things
we talked about handle what happens within a block. We also have to worry about what
happens across blocks. Given a particular record, which block should it go to? Assume
that a relation has 100 blocks, approximately, and a new tuple comes in. Where should this
tuple go? Since you have all been required, anyone want to try to suggest options for
where a block should go? Where a new tuple should go? Let us say here. The new instructor
tuple comes in. Let us assume there is space. Do not worry about pages being full. Where
should the new tuple go and why? Anyone want to try to pick a page?
Take a guess at that. Next to the? So, let us assume that the principle of locality is
important to keep in mind. Let us assume all of these contain instructor tuples. Let us
further assume that all of these blocks have space for now. In that case, should there
be anything that governs where I dump this particular tuple in?
So I have the instructor blocks. So these are all the instructor blocks. Let us assume
that the number of blocks is fixed for now. We will worry about what happens when we run
out of them. Let us say it is 100 blocks. Then the suggestion here, if I were to rephrase
it, is that, and let us say there is instructor which has an ID. So what I will do is I will
do an H of ID mod 100 and I will place it in the block that this comes out with. So
this is block 0, block 1, block 2 up to block 99. I hash ID and take mod 100 so that I
can fit it in this 100 and put it in the place where it gets located. Make sense?
Any thoughts on pros and cons of this approach? There are basically three or four approaches
we will talk about. Three, I guess. Any pros or cons of this approach? Anyone want to try
to suggest?
Same? But that is fine because these blocks can contain, let us say, 50 tuples each.
So we will have collisions. After I do a mod, I will have collisions and that is fine.
Well, yes and no. We are kind of pre-supposing the answer here a little bit. So the benefit
of doing this is that if I am looking for a particular instructor with a particular
ID, I know exactly which block it contains. That is kind of an index basically. It makes
my searching much easier. If I am looking for instructor 101, I know the hash function.
I simply take H of that and mod 100. I know exactly which block to go to. So in fact it
actually makes indexing easier, not harder. Because remember the data movement from disk
to memory is in the units of blocks. So I am going to read the block anyway. So it does
not really matter if there is multiple tuples in the block and the tuples are laid out in
different ways. The within block structure does not matter for disk to memory. It matters
for memory to cache, which is where the packs comes in. But for disk to memory, because
I am doing a block at a time, it does not really matter.
Any other pros and cons of this? A big pro here is this particular indexing thing that
was entered there. I can quickly find tuples that match a particular ID. A related con
which exists for all of hash indexes is that I cannot do queries like this. This is difficult
for me to do. If I am looking for all instructors between ID 90 and 102, which is a very common
query, range queries as these are called are very common. These I cannot do using hash
indexes very easily in general. There is one form of hash index. In general any hash index
will make these queries more difficult. Any questions?
And then of course, I have to worry about what happens when I run out of space in a
block. There is a fixed number of tuples in each block. So, I kind of have to figure out
what to do in that case. And again there are standard approaches. You can have overflow
blocks or things like that. We will talk about this actually. We have a few slides on this
material afterwards. So, that is option one, hash. What other option do I have to throw
tuples into these 100 blocks? Anyone else? One thing is I could just throw them anywhere.
Wherever there is empty space I could just dump it anywhere. There is no guarantees on
the data and this is often called heap organization. Although I am not sure how common this, I
completely misspelled that, heap organization. But I am not sure how common this is in practice
anymore. The third approach is actually the one that is most commonly used, which is to
keep them sorted. We sort all of these on ID. We have to choose one attribute to sort
and it is typically the primary key. This is why we care about primary key a little
bit in databases along with some other reasons. But one primary reason is also that the relations
are usually sorted by the primary key. So, we are going to keep them sorted by primary
key, 1, 2, 3. And this is actually one of the more common representations. So, anywhere
there is called heap organization sorted by SSN. So, this is called sequential organization.
But keeping it sorted would be painful. But you know there are quite a lot of benefits
to doing this. So, we would actually usually do that. How would you search if it is sorted
by SSN or ID in this case? So, if I have a million blocks here, the data is sorted by
ID and I ask for ID equal to 397. How would I sort it? How would I sort it? How would
I search through this? Binary search. Hopefully all of you know how binary search works. So,
assuming I do not know anything else about the ID distribution because if I do know how
IDs are distributed, I can do better. But assuming I do not know anything, I would jump
to the middle and then jump here, jump here, jump here, jump here. So, that is binary search.
Binary search will take log to the base 2 of 1 million which is equal to 20 blocks.
So, I would have to read 20 blocks in the worst case if I were to do binary search on
a million blocks. A million blocks is about 4 gigabytes of data. So, we are not talking
like instant volumes here. 4 gigabytes is large, but it is not too large. So, 20 blocks. Remember,
it takes 10 milliseconds per block read, approximately. It is a ballpark number we
work with. So, that is 200 milliseconds for a single lookup, which means I can run 5 queries
per second. That is actually really low. I cannot live with 5 queries per second, especially
if my disk is simply busy just doing these queries and nothing else. The reason why it
is so bad is because these are random reads. I am jumping here, then I am jumping here,
then I am jumping here. At the end, they are somewhat close by, but overall they are
sort of random reads. So, 20 random reads is a lot. Does anyone know how to make this
better? Any thoughts on making this better than 20 reads? So, database systems will basically
do 3 reads for a million blocks under certain assumptions, not maybe 4. So, not 20, but
3 or 4. In fact, in practice, they end up doing like 1. So, we will talk about that
when we talk about B plus trees. The third one is the hash keys. So, that is the approach
that I suggested first. We call it hashing. Sequential, keep it sorted by search key.
The big problem is you have to keep it sorted, which is not straightforward. So, the main
problem is that the block where it belongs to may be full. So, these are sorted blocks,
a new tuple comes in, it needs to be here, but this block is full. Now, what do I do?
So, can I have to deal with that? The typical option is to create an overflow block and
keep a pointer. But at some point, these overflow blocks become too painful to manage and then
you have to re-sort of fragment it. There is no magical solution here. This is kind
of what you do. Very engineering solution. So, you create overflow pages. At some point,
you have a threshold, they become too much. You sort of bite the bullet and just reorganize
it. The main challenge with reorganizing it is that everything is going to have to stop
while you do this reorganization. So, you have to be a little bit careful in how you
do it. Deletes, you know, just keep the free space. Don't worry about deletes. Insertions
tend to be more common than deletes. So, the free space gets used up. Any questions?
Inside the block? So, again, it doesn't help me for the disk to memory movement because
I am going to read the entire block in memory anyway. So, what you do within the block is
less important. It becomes important for CPU processing and there it may matter. But
really the costly part is here fetching the block. And that doesn't really care about
the within block order. It does matter, but just a little less. Any other questions? Binary
research. Why did I get? Oh, this is billion, okay. So, this is basically just the same
thing we talked about. Before we get into B plus trees, there is one last topic I wanted
to cover, which is a really important topic and that you will encounter in the, in practice
a lot, which is the column-oriented storage, okay. So, what I mean by that, you know, as
shown in the example here. So, that's the row-oriented storage, okay, where I store
tuples row at a time, okay. So, that's what we talked about earlier. So, this block contains
a few records, this block contains a few records, this block contains a few records. That's
my example relation. The column-oriented approach is to store columns together, okay. This is
similar to the PACS thing we talked about, but this is doing it across all the blocks.
It's not doing it within a block. PACS does it within a block, okay, whereas this approach
is doing it across the entire relation. So, in fact, every block, like in a, in one example
case here, this block will only contain the employee number. This block will only contain
the employee name. This block will only contain the employee job titles and so on, okay.
So, we're not like, we don't have multiple, like we don't have multiple attributes within
a block at all. Each block only contains attributes from a single column, okay. Of course, one
column gets spread out across multiple blocks, but each block itself will only contain one
column, okay. So, this is called column-oriented storage and this has become increasingly very
common, especially in high-performance systems, okay. Does this make sense? Any questions
on this so far?
How do you, like, retain the mapping from here? How do you know that 7309 is different?
So the most important question that you have to first answer here is how do I reconstruct
a specific tuple? Eventually, I'm going to need to reconstruct the tuple, okay, potentially.
Someone might do a select star query, just to see, or they might say select star where
employee is 7366 or whatever that number is. It barely read it, 7369, okay. So, you have
to reconstruct the tuples. That's the most important challenge with this. There's two-three
major challenges with column-oriented storage. That's one of them. So, the way you do it
is, and this paper doesn't say it, but the positions of this matter. So, the first position
in each column is one tuple. Second position is another tuple and so on, okay. So, you
actually keep track of the positions and you can't mess with the positions. And so, those
positions are what is going to allow us to reconstruct the tuples, okay. So, if I want
to reconstruct tuple number three with 7521, I will essentially read the third entry from
this column, third entry from this column, third entry from this column, okay. It's actually
very expensive to read three different blocks in order to read a single tuple. In fact,
five blocks in this case. In order to reconstruct a single tuple, I have to read five different
blocks, whereas in the original case, I would have to only read one block. So, I'm actually
paying a lot of cost to reconstruct the tuples, but the main sort of motivation for column-oriented
storage is that most of the queries only access a few columns. In fact, it's not uncommon
to see tables with 20, 30 columns and only a few of the columns, only one or two columns
are used in each query. So, the benefit that you're getting is that you can only retrieve
those two columns and not retrieve the rest of the 20, 30 columns, okay. So, that's where
the trade-off comes in. Database systems, in general, systems is all about trade-offs,
you know. There is no solution that's always going to work best under all circumstances.
The trade-off here is that reading a single tuple is very expensive, but most analytical
queries are much faster, okay. So, the benefit sort of to lay them, reduced IO, only fetch
the relevant queries, especially useful when the table has 50 columns and the query only
wants two or three of them. You have a much better CPU cache performance, okay. It's the
same reason why PAX works well, same reason this also works well. The compression is much
better. You can compress each block much better. Now, instead of a single block having some
strings, some integers, some floats and all that, each block only has data of one type.
That makes compression much better, okay. And then they can better utilize modern CPUs.
We won't discuss this, but vectorized CPUs that we have today, column stores are naturally
better at exploiting those, okay. Lots of pluses. The biggest drawback, reconstructing tuples
is expensive. Updates are really hard, okay. Updating a tuple requires you to do a lot
of extra work and deleting is also pretty hard. So, deletes and updates actually have
to be treated differently for these systems, okay. Despite this, at this point, given current
modern hardware, columnar storage has become extremely common. It's widely used in data
warehouses and also in many other systems as well. Questions?
So, that's a really good question. It does not have a super easy answer, but at the PACS
school, I think PACS are an example of this. No, it doesn't have an example of this. There
are a couple of different ways you can do it. First of all, you never really have something
as empty. Databases will store it as a null. So, we can just store the null explicitly,
okay. Better option is to keep track of, have an empty, like a bit array associated with
the positions and you set the bit to be one if the data is null, okay, or vice versa.
It really depends whether this is beneficial or not. It really depends on how many nulls
you are expecting. If you are expecting lots of nulls, then having the bit array to keep
track of the nulls is a better option, okay. But all of these tricks are played by modern
data warehouses. They are trying to get the best performance out of the system and, you
know, hundreds of papers have been written on how to optimize these things. Any other
questions? We are not discussing this in a lot of detail. If you are really interested
in this topic more, I highly recommend Dan Abadi's 624. 624 is designed for, like, as
an undergraduate plus graduate course. It's pretty structured and you learn a lot about
all of these things, okay, column-oriented storage, transactions, systems, and all of
that stuff. If you are interested, I highly recommend that course, although I don't think
he's teaching it in the next year, but I'm not sure. How many of you have heard of something
called Parquet files, okay, Parquet or Avro files, especially those who have done intensures?
Anyone? Have you heard of them? Do you know what they are? Anyone else? So the issue of
columnar storage also comes up on files, right. So we are used to CSV files, okay.
We are used to CSV files, right. CSV files have, you know, they are text files.
We have dealt with these types of files a lot, okay, like in data science courses and
in pandas, in just general processing. CSV files have several problems when I'm storing
millions of records, okay. If I am storing millions of records, the CSV files have a bunch
of problems. One is that they are text files. Text is really inefficient, so you would ideally
like to compress it, okay. That's one problem. You have to deserialize it, okay, which means that
when I read this, I have to actually read in the string, then I have to convert it into the object
representation in order to use it, okay, because CSV files typically, you know, the first column
is an ID, second column is a name. They have a very fixed structure in most cases, but I do have
to parse it, okay. I don't get it for free, okay. So there is reconstruction cost and then there is
the same issue that we just talked about, which is that the data will be stored in a row by row
format because that's what the CSV file is, right. It's basically bytes that are stored on this and
they are stored in this order, okay. However, we take the same ideas we just talked about and
replace this first with a columnar format
and second, we use an internal representation, sort of a more compressed
representation that also does not require deserialization, okay, and that's the idea
behind these formats called parquet, avro, protocol buffers, and arrow.
They have slightly different use cases. Parquet is the one that we see most commonly,
but all of them have very similar ideas. They are all designed to address basically this problem
with CSV files, okay, which is that the text files, they need to be deserialized and they
are fundamentally a row-based representation, okay. Parquet files will fix all three of these.
First, you will move to a columnar representation, then second, the representation here will be
compressed, and third, the representation will not require deserialization, okay,
and it will somehow be able to directly read it without deserializing it and serializing it when
you are writing it, okay. Parquet files are extremely commonly used today. If you end up
in any system that you are dealing with significant volumes of data, you are likely to be using
parquet files. You may not even realize it because the Python Pandas library can directly read from
parquet. So you might not even realize you are using it, but you are using it, okay.
So these are columnar file representations, okay. CSV or JSON, they also handle JSON,
they actually handle JSON, but depends on which one. So they handle both CSV files and JSON
collections. Modern data lakes have thousands to millions of such files, and they often support
SQL over them through Spark. In fact, that's what Databricks, the company that sort of develops
Spark, that's Databricks' big value proposition is this ability to write SQL queries against
parquet files, okay. I'm simplifying a bit, but that's what they do.
Same three things I just talked about. Binary compressed representations are faster,
parsing or deserialization is expensive, and row versus column representation.
Okay, sort of an example of it. They kind of look... So this is from the... I just put this
out there because it's from the book. So if you wanted more details, you can certainly read it
in the book. But topics like parquet, you are better off just, you know, looking for some
tutorials online. You'll find tons of information. Sorry, I'm just trying to read. I don't really
know the ORC format, so I'm just trying to parse this. I think basically what it's saying is that
so each of these is basically a column, okay, or maybe not. Anyway, let's ignore this one for now.
But it basically looks like a columnar format. The data is stored column by column with appropriate
positions so that you can reconstruct them, okay. Any questions? All right. So this lecture gets us
to the summary of this topic. Storage layouts are a very important consideration because the
given like, you know, gigabytes or terabytes of data sizes, the significant impact of small
changes here can actually be huge on your running queries, okay. Primary decision you end up making
is row versus column. Row representations are better for transactional systems where you are
updating. So PostgreSQL is actually better than its row representation because most of the uses
of PostgreSQL are typically as a backend to a web application or something where updates are very
common, okay. But Snowflake, Amazon Redshift, they require column representation. Databricks, Spark,
you know, they kind of work better with columnar representation. Hybrid representations have been
tried, but they really don't work. It's still sort of an open research question as to whether
you can make them work, okay. And there are many other secondary considerations that we talked
about. Sort orders, hashing, cache performance, and so on, okay. This is a big part of the
performance and so on. This is a big topic. I've tried to give you sort of a broad sense of what
some of these things are, but really if you're interested in digging deep into it, you would
likely need to do more work or take another course. Not my 7.24, I don't cover that. The graduate
course I teach, I don't go deep into these topics, but Dan does in his course. Similar issues exist
for non-relational data as well. Document store also has similar issues. So whatever we do here
can be applied to other domains. Like pandas, for instance, there have been quite a few improvements
in pandas over the last few years trying to exploit some of these ideas there. Questions?
Before we jump into the next topic. The next topic is B plus tricks.
All right. So I'm not going to cover B plus tricks in a ton of detail. I'll explain why later.
We covered it at a high level. The ideas, like as long as you get the basic ideas
that that should be good enough. I've laid out some specific things to focus on in that
post I made on Piazza. The book covers B plus tricks in a lot of detail. So if you're confused
about anything, want to read it in more detail, the book is a great resource for it.
So an index is something that helps us find tuples more efficiently. It's really not a very
difficult concept to grasp. There are a lot of, you guys have already seen search trees.
So B plus tree index is a variation on a search tree. So let's develop this ourselves before we
actually go into the details of it. So let's say this is my instructor,
sorted by ID. So ID one, two, five, seven, eight, nine, up to like, let's assume there are millions
of them. So the question that comes up is, I want to search efficiently. These are blocks.
Each of these is a block, contains let's say 100 tuples each. All of these are averages,
so we'll assume that this contains 100 tuples approximately. So we already talked about the
binary search approach. The binary search approach is to, assuming we don't know anything else,
we jump right in the middle of these million blocks and let's say we're looking for ID equal
to three, four, seven. We jump right into the middle of this and then we go here or here based
on what we see. The problem with binary search is that it's going to be locked to the base of two,
a million, which is 20. So the first question is, how do we make this better? How can we reduce
the number of IOs that we're doing? By sort of realizing that the IO with the disk is in units
of blocks. Anyone want to take a stab at this before I start with a simple solution here?
Okay. So I'm going to jump ahead a little bit there to see the more extreme scenario. Let's
say I give you one block to use, just one block. I tell you that this block you can use as an extra
information to help you search. So what should that block contain? Just one block that can contain
100 entries. I use the word entry here because these are not tuples per se, but there's something
else. So what I'm going to do with these 100 entries is I'm going to create,
I'm going to divide my million blocks into 100 chunks. And for each chunk, I will keep the ID
here. ID 1, ID 5700, ID 6800, ID 9000, and so on. So what I'm doing here is that this one here is
the first entry in the first chunk. 5700 is the first entry in the second chunk. 6800 is the first
entry in the third chunk. I'm essentially going to keep track of the first ID in each of these
100 chunks, and that I'm going to store here. Now when you ask me for 347, I know that 347
must be in this range here because I can see this 1 and 5700. 347 lies between them,
so it must be in here. And I can do a binary search in that. So this way I have reduced the
number of binary search that I have to do by a factor of 100. Not number of binary search I have
to do, but the amount of blocks I have to do a binary search over is now much smaller.
Does this intuition make sense to everyone? Because B plus 3 is basically a generalization
of this idea. This is more or less what B plus 3 does, except it will add more levels instead of 1.
Any questions on this?
So once again what I have is I have a single extra block. That block will contain whatever
number of entries it can contain. It will contain essentially a pointer to the start of this chunk
plus the smallest entry that I see in this chunk here. And same goes on.
The B plus 3 will generalize this and say that even within this let's have another block.
Let's go here. So I'll add another sort of block in between which will allow you to even
narrow it down further. What I'm effectively doing is that I'm reducing the number of blocks
I have to look at by a factor of 100 every time. So instead of doing log to the base 2,
now I'm going to end up with log to the base 100 which is equal to 3.
Because every time I'm reducing the range of blocks I have to look for by a factor of 100.
And that's why B plus 3 gets me a 3 or even 2 in many cases, whereas binary search will require
20 reads. Whereas a B plus 3 will get that to me in 3 reads in this case. Any questions?
All right. So let's jump into it.
So this is what a B plus 3 looks like from the book.
What we see here is that so this is the relation. Here in this case the relation is separated out
from the index which is how we saw it earlier on. The relation blocks are separate from the index.
So we have pointers into the index. Note that this index is actually on name whereas the relation
is sorted on ID. So that that has important implications here but it doesn't change the
fundamentals of it. So at the top level I have a root node which helps me redirect between
Mozart, less than Mozart and more than Mozart. Next level I have another thing that helps me
sort of choose between you know less than Einstein, between Einstein and gold and more than gold.
The way I use this B plus 3 is basically I started the root and I simply go down
the appropriate path. So if I'm looking for sing if I'm looking for sing which is here
I come here I say okay sing is more than Mozart go here sing is less than Srinivasan go here
in this block I find sing there is associated pointer I follow the pointer and I get to wherever
sing is and get to sing. So that's kind of how a B plus tree is used. The fundamental property
that I need from the B plus tree is that this particular less than greater than is satisfied
at all times. If that is not satisfied then I have a problem because that these these these are what
are called search keys they are crucial to direct the traffic and I can't get them wrong they have
to be you know if there's a mistake in them then I will not find the tuples I'm looking for
and I might actually conclude that they don't exist. Any questions?
So B plus tree node structure looks something like this the top level like everything except
the root everything except the leaves so so these are leaves they have a slightly different
structure than these because leaves are not redirecting traffic anymore they simply have
direct pointers to data okay whereas these index nodes they are directing traffic they have a
different structure okay slightly different. The index nodes have a structure that looks like this
they are pointer key pointer key and so on key ki the keys are called search keys or search key
values pi are pointers to children or pointers to leave the search keys in a node must be ordered
for this to work remember in typically there will be hundreds or thousands of entries in each block
not two in this case I have two there will typically be hundreds to thousands of entries
okay so they have to be ordered and in fact I usually do binary search in them
to more efficiently find what I'm looking for they are large enough that sequential scanning
is actually inefficient but that's a cpu issue so we are more concerned about disk and memory here
and they need to be ordered okay. Any questions?
It is completely dictated by how fast it narrows down right so in this case I only have five nodes
at the bottom here which results in two nodes here given the constraints on the number of pointers
which results in one more node here there is no point to going further than that so it's
completely dictated by how many blocks I have at the lowest level okay so every time I'm going
to reduce it by a factor of hundred or thousand and at some point I reach one okay
so that's a good point so an individual node at the leaf node what do you point to
and that does actually depend a little bit on how the data is stored at the at the bottom of it
right so
so this is my lowest level of the index and this is my relation
if this is an index on id and if this relation is sorted on id
then I can simply put a pointer here and for all of these I can just sort of use the same
pointer because it's sorted by like the index is on id so this is sorted by id
this is sorted by id so it works out well okay but if this is sorted by id and the index is on
name then I'm going to have you know pointers going all over the place because this is not
sorted by name this is sorted by name so there will be a big mix of pointers now if for instance
in this case there were two instructors named einstein I might have two pointers to two different
places okay so einstein here may not have just one pointer it might have two pointers associated
with it and that would be fine okay so if I'm looking for einstein I'll follow both of those
pointers and one might be here one might be here no guarantee that they are sorted by by name
I mean they are not sorted by name so they will be all over the place
okay any other questions so this distinction between between ordered versus unordered is
an important one they're also called primary versus sparse indexes or primary versus secondary
indexes so this one is an example of a secondary index a primary index can only be built on the
attribute on which it's sorted so in this case we can only have a primary index on id but we
can have secondary index on name on department on salary and so on any questions
you may not use a b plus tree in that case if I'm doing a select star there isn't really any
benefit in doing b plus trees I might as well just go straight to the relation so it does depend
like b plus tree is an option to use if you if it's beneficial it's most beneficial when there
is only a few tuples that match the condition if if thousands of tuples are going to match the
condition you're probably better off just doing a sequential scan just go to the relation scan
from top to bottom or start to end b plus trees will be better if I'm looking for specific
instructor or specific range of instructors or specific range of ids you know
any other questions
right so we're not going I'm not going to discuss b plus tree in a ton of detail
I'll discuss at a high level and make sure you understand the key concepts but I will go through
these slides the b plus tree is balanced so some of the trees that you might have seen like evil
trees or two three trees or red black trees you know several of those are actually not balanced
trees you can kind of have some leaves at a different distance than other leaves I've forgotten I don't
know exactly which trees do you guys study in the earlier courses
binary search tree but that's not really a is that actual search tree that you constructed
what about avian trees
kd trees kd trees is a bit more advanced all of like special trees are fine
so but none of them are done in 351 I would have thought at least
420 actually used to be a prerequisite but at one time we took it out because it made things too
complicated for students but actually used to be a prerequisite 420 was a prerequisite for a bunch
of courses at one point so in any case in future when you take 420 you will find out that you will
learn about these different index trees and and many of them are not balanced b plus trees are
balanced leaf nodes are contained simply pointers to tuples and also leaf nodes contain these special
pointers that's like a next pointer that helps us sort of scan through the leaf nodes so if I'm
looking for everything between Einstein and Srinivas and I will look for the starting point
which is Einstein and then I will kind of just go through this okay and that for that I require
the leaves to be chained so the last pointer in the leaves is a pointer to the next leaf
sorry yeah it's kind of a linked list but linked list at the sort of the level of blocks okay so
yeah it is a linked list
any questions interior nodes are the search key so we kind of already talked about it
how to search you follow the pointers okay it's logarithmic so if b is the number of entries per
block maximum number of entries per block then the term that we use is log of n to the base b by 2
we use b by 2 because the blocks may not be full like as we saw here
the root only has one entry where it actually has space for three entries and four pointers so leaf
has space for four pointers it only has two pointers and this node has a space for four
pointers it's only using three pointers and so on so they might not be full but we do require them
to be at least half full so if there are four pointers we require that at least two be used
okay obviously four and two doesn't make sense if there are space for 100 pointers we require that
at least 50 pointers are used okay otherwise the b plus tree is considered under full okay
and and potentially subject to reorganization
another thing to keep in mind for b plus is the way the reason they work very well is that the
remember that a database typically only has a small number of relations right even if it
has 50 relations it's still relatively small it may have hundreds of indexes the top levels of
the index are often in memory because they get used so frequently every query goes to the index
so the top levels because of the locality properties the top levels of the index are
often in memory which means that the number of actual accesses you do is even smaller than that
the root of all the indexes you might as well just keep it in memory doesn't really take that
much space just the root okay and maybe the next level as well just keep them in memory so
typically because those levels are in memory the actual time per request is even smaller
example b plus tree what we just discussed root internal nodes leaf nodes there is one exception
to the under full rule the the rule that requires every node to have at least half the pointers
and that's the root root is actually allowed to have even just two pointers that's acceptable
there is no way to force that like that's that's too complicated doesn't make a lot of sense so
root can actually have less than half root can be less than half full we are okay with that
everything else must be at least half full
when inserting and deleting so in the past we have actually gone through the algorithm
but i'm not sort of doing it anymore a primary reason for it is that b plus trees have fallen
out of favor in in modern systems okay modern systems use something called log structured merge
trees or lsm trees pretty much all modern systems today if they use indexing the other use some
form of hash indexes for in memory or they use lsm trees for on disk indexing okay so i think
b plus trees is important to understand but i also don't see a point in going through full
details on their algorithm so we'll discuss the algorithms intuitively at a high level
but not the detailed algorithms themselves and we will talk about lsm trees which i started
talking about discussing in like last time i taught this while inserting or deleting
two properties have to be maintained each block must remain half full and the tree must remain
balanced and and same we do with deleting as well okay so here's what some examples of inserts
look like yeah so what's happening here is what did i do here insertion of atoms in b plus tree
okay so that's my b plus tree okay that i started with i'm ignoring the pointers at the bottom
because those are not that important so we'll walk through this example we just won't don't
walk through the entire algorithm in detail so in this case we want to insert atoms okay
atoms needs to go here it's smaller than brand so it has to be in this node but this node is full
it already has three pointers okay so this this pointer is actually off this pointer should be
here it's a mistake in the book so this has already has three entries so it doesn't have
any space for atoms okay so what we're going to do here is we're going to basically split this
into two nodes okay so now i put adams and brant in one node california and creek in another node
because i did this i also have to modify the interior node to add in one extra pointer in
there okay so that's the that's the modification that happened when i tried to insert atoms into
that index i ended up with one extra node adams and brant or this one one of them is new
i think it's actually this one that's new and i ended up adding an extra entry here which did
not exist before because i need to separate differentiate like i need to sort of direct
traffic between these two so i added one extra entry in here
so the property is that anything less than california goes here anything more than california
goes here so you will see that everywhere you will see the same thing this one is
einstein this one is gold the below srinivasan is here above srinivasan is here so we're still
maintaining that property that we have greater than equal to in this side so greater than equal
to follow this pointer less than follow that pointer make sense i'll leave this up for a
minute because basically i'm going to walk through a few examples like this and that's to the extent
i'm planning to discuss b plus tree updates any other questions on what happened here and why it
happened now obviously the real algorithm also has to deal with the possibility that this node
is also overfull so that also might need to get spread and eventually if everything all the way
to the root is full then you might actually end up creating a new root and thereby increase the
level of the tree that's going to happen very very infrequently like extremely infrequently
but the algorithm does handle that case
any questions
here's a question for you could this here be
i'm just making up over here so could this here instead of srinivasan srinivasan be small okay
would that be okay
okay
and what would be a problem with that
all
okay so one obvious issue is that we don't actually have a small as an instructor in the
relation anywhere but is that a problem for the index
so the point of this search case is to simply direct traffic and small currently can direct
traffic as well as srinivasan can everything before small goes here above small goes here
it's perfectly fine search keys don't have to exist in the relation there is no requirement
that's the only point i wanted to make that is that the search keys do not have to they have
to follow the requirements on the ordering but there is no requirement that the search
keys belong to the relation itself
we're going to do another insert here so
whatever is it lamport okay lamport has to be inserted gold it needs to go in that node there
okay gold cats came as a case so it actually after came that node is full so lamport has to be
like we have to result in a in a split okay note that you will actually notice that there
is some extra space in the previous node what i could imagine doing is i could imagine moving
gold into that node and add lamport into this node okay there's some variations on b plus trees
that might try to do that okay what they might say is that you know what lamport needs to go
in here there is no space here but there is space here why don't we move gold here and then have
cat scheme lamport here i'll need to change this key this can't be gold anymore but it's doable
now most b plus tree implementations don't do that because inserts are pretty common like inserts
are more common than deletes so it doesn't really make sense to do extra work while doing the insert
just go ahead and split because if you don't split it now you're going to split it in another minute
okay so might as well just go ahead and split it now so in this case we split it gold cat scheme
we created two nodes gold cat scheme lamport two nodes this required adding something here except
this is also full so this is going to get split and after this got split i added a new entry to
the to the root okay and and now i'm done okay so this was a more destructive update because now
it involved me changing essentially add a new node here add a new node here and make a change
to the root question deletes work the opposite way okay so if i have this and if i'm deleting
let's say cats first of all deleting cats there is no issue okay because that node has has three
that index node that leaf node has three entries it needs to have at least two so i can delete cats
and there is no issue okay deleting gold okay so this makes the same point i just made
if i delete gold from here you might say i should delete it from here also but there is no reason
to do it gold here this gold here is only there to to direct traffic so i don't really need to
change it as long as it's not causing any problems i don't need to change this okay
purpose of the search case is purely to direct searches
what about deleting singh and woo from here both of these well now after i've deleted both of them
this node is now under full so i have to do some reorg here so what this is showing here is a
little bit of a reorg between this node and this node essentially a redistribution so that both the
nodes remain full half full okay so in this case what's ending up happening is that i have singh
and woo are gone i have mozart there i sort of borrowed kim from this node into here so now both
of them are half full as a result of it i have to change this search key from mozart to kim
otherwise this would be wrong okay so this type of a redistribution is also done
depending on the exact implementation of b plus tree you might or might not do it but this is
common minor redistributions that only involve nearby nodes is acceptable
another example of a b plus tree delete the gold this would actually be a more involved
change because because of this so i'm removing gold from there
remove gold from there so now i if i try to merge cat scheme and mozart as i did here
the interior node above that becomes problematic okay so i won't go into details of this but this
is an example where i actually reduce the size of the tree because essentially in order to keep it
under like the 50 full property i have to get rid of the entire node and as a result of it i
also have to get rid of the root itself okay so this is an example where i went from a three level
tree to a two level tree after deletion of gold now modern trees will almost never like most
implementations will never actually do this again inserts are more common than deletes so
we will actually live with an under full tree for a while in the hopes that new tuples come in
and fill up the gaps okay but that's like an engineering detail technically the b plus tree
deletion algorithm will require you to reduce the level of the tree
so the benefits of b plus trees is that they reduce the number of block accesses that you need
dramatically and b plus trees were originally proposed in late 70s they exist even today they
exist in many database systems and you know that sort of the algorithms and techniques for them
have been developed like long time ago but they're still quite common b plus trees as i mentioned
modern systems are are built using lsm trees which we will discuss a little bit later
and as i noted in that list of topics the questions on b plus trees that you can expect
would primarily be around like you know simple insert deletes and validity of a b plus trees
that because we are not covering the algorithm in detail we won't really be asking questions on that
i kind of because of the way we did this i skipped over
some early slides so let me just cover those quickly
basically an index is a you know these are again going back a little bit index is a any kind of
data structure that's used for efficient searching and they can be sort based or they can be hash
based so b plus tree is a sort based index search key for an index is the attribute i'm searching
on okay so ssn for a person's name or id for instructors and so on based on whether you are
using ordering or hashing you can have ordered indexes or hash based index right and the best
analogy for indexes still remains the library index right like if you if you use libraries
the way you would search the library is you know it's actually called an index as well
very very similar ideas and ordered index we talked about primary versus secondary indexes
in a primary index the relation is sorted by the search key in a secondary index it's not sorted
so this is an example of a primary index this index here is a very simple index not a b plus
three but the precursor to b plus three it only keeps track of sort of periodically keeps track of
every fifth entry one zero zero zero one three two three four three seven six seven six six
using this i can quickly go to the part of the relation that my data belongs to it is an example
of a primary index okay we can only have one primary index on a relation okay another benefit
of a primary index is that it can also be sparse because every key so every search key
is not present in the index the index can be much sparser which reduces the size of the index
dramatically by factors of hundreds okay so so primary sparse indexes are b plus three is an
example of a primary sparse index they are you know they just make a lot of sense we just build
them in that posse scale won't even wait for you to ask it just will build b plus trees or primary
keys just by default okay other indexes you have to explicitly ask posse scale to build them if you
want to build a secondary index you actually have to ask posse scale to build it for you
but primary indexes it will basically just build them they just they are low cost they just make
sense dense index is the opposite of it every key must appear in the index so the index can
become pretty large so this kind of an example of a dense index there is no specific benefit
to this index but in general like secondary indexes have to be dense okay so this is a
secondary index the index is on salary the relation is sorted by id so my index here is
sorted by salary but because the relation is not sorted by salary there there are pointers all over
the place okay that's the reason it's a secondary index so i end up like every key must be present
in the index and i will end up with a lot of random accesses okay so it must be dense so sometimes
the words get confusing there is also a word called clustered index but which i'm not introducing
here the words get confusing the the key ones you should remember is primary versus secondary
that's a that's the most important one primary means if the index is on the same attribute on
which the relation is sorted secondary means that the the search key in the index and the relation
are sorted are different like the relation is sorted by one attribute the search key is another
attribute so that's the primary lecture that's a not to overuse that word but that's the main
distinction to keep in mind primary versus secondary the sparse versus dense is a less important
there's actually just pointers like this here is a is a remember we talked about record ids
like the pointers to the disk blocks you know these are these are essentially pointers they're
saying where should i find a tuple so it's a pointer on the disk of some form like a block number
plus position within the block all of these that once we show as pointers here even these
these are essentially block pointers or the record point that they're telling us where to
find a particular record so that typically block plus position
if you want to yes that's usually too expensive but typically what you do is and this is a job
that typically database administrators have done based on the query workload they have decided what
indexes make sense today there exists some automated solutions that will sort of decide
for you but they're still in development somewhat in cloud compute in cloud computing world
especially automated techniques have become more and more common but in the past you go back two
decades the database administrators made the decisions primary keys you always build them
primary indexes you always build them secondary indexes the database administrator has to make
a decision because there is a cost they have to be kept up to date and update keeping them up to
date is not cheap any other questions we already talked about this this multi-level indexes but
just this is the last slide i have on this topic so this is kind of the this is my relation i have
one level of index then i have a second level of index exactly like how b plus 3 is okay but
the generalization of that is a multi-level index if the index itself is too big then you create
another sort of index for an index and that idea is what b plus tree also has so b plus tree is a
multi-level index but on top of being multi-level it's also ordered and balanced you can have a
multi-level index that's not balanced b plus tree is a balanced index all right so there are no
more questions we can stop here we'll next week we'll continue with some of the other indexing
stuff including including lsm trees and once again exam on thursday
