 I thought we will do a quick review of the parallel and distributed architectures from previous set of slides before we dig into distributed transactions. This will be very quick. So what we are talking about is really more suitable for distributed transactions but some of it does apply to parallel architectures as well. Again, the main distinction I make between parallel and distributed is whether the machines are co-located or not. Otherwise, the shared nothing architecture is kind of very similar for parallel versus distributed. The main distinction is that in a shared nothing architecture in a parallel system, these machines are all co-located. They are potentially in the same rack, definitely same data center which means that they are connected by a very, very fast interconnect and the latencies for communication are very low. So that changes the considerations a little bit. What we are going to talk about is really more for distributed systems. So back then when we talked about distributed, we kind of look at a setting like this where we have geographically diverse locations in which the data is present. So you have some data here, some data here, some data here and all that. It's all over the world. So distributed architectures are typically done because of necessity. They are not done because they give better performance. They are like a big company like Facebook which has offices all over as well as customers all over. And that's why they have machines all over. And the data has to be, you know, it's the same data in many cases. The same, same like one, in a Facebook case, a user here may have friends here, may have friends here. So it's kind of the same data you are dealing with. But the data is distributed, which is a headache to deal with. And in the last 20 years or so, this particular topic of how do you update data across these machines has seen an immense amount of research work. And we still see papers on this topic. And it's a real problem. It's not just academic research. Companies like Google, Amazon, they continue to do research on this topic because there is more performance that they need. And so they are trying to figure out different ways to do it. One of the hottest databases is one you probably have never heard of. It's called CockroachDB. And CockroachDB came out about maybe six, seven years ago, maybe a little bit longer. I don't know too much about their background. But they are basically a distributed Postgres. So they took Postgres and distributed like essentially it's a service, sort of a service plan. It's a platform that they sell you, not a system per se. And CockroachDB takes Postgres and distributes it and does distributed stuff on top of it. And they have been very successful to my understanding. And they are relatively new. The challenges with distributed system that is the biggest one for us, like one of the major challenges for us, aside from the data itself being distributed, is a data replication. So data atoms are typically replicated. So this is an example, sort of a toy example, which shows the same relation being replicated on three machines. For our sort of setting here, assume that these three machines are all over the world. Now, we have great read performance because the read queries can go to any one of these machines. So if one machine is in San Francisco, one in India, one in China, the users in China when they're asking for data, they can go here and so on. So the latencies are lower, performance is better. But, assuming this relation R or this dataset R needs to be updated, when I update it here, it has to be updated here and here. So I have an extra cost of updates now. And this is the one that we are going to talk about. How do you update a data item that is stored in multiple locations or how do you do a transaction that touches on data items that are on multiple locations? It's the same problem. Whether there is a single data item that's replicated or multiple data items that are located on different machines that we need to update, it's the same problem. And because of replication, this problem is sort of everywhere. Is the setup here clear? One thing that we didn't talk about too much, I don't actually have slides on this, but I just want to briefly touch upon. So, I have machine 1 here and a data item on it, let's say A. I have machine 2 here and the same data item and machine 3 and the same data item. So, ignore this part. There are a few different things I can do when I want to update it. So, one thing is that we want to keep this synchronized somehow. So, we want the reads and writes to be consistent. So, one option is that, option 1, read A can go to any machine but write A must go to all machines. Hopefully, it is legible. So, what I'm saying is that my first option which is what we just talked about in the previous slide is that, when I'm reading it, I can go to any of these machines. But as a result of it, when I'm writing it, I have to update all of these in a single transaction. But I actually have alternates. So, the alternative option is option 2 which is read A goes to any two machines. Write A goes to any two machines. So, what this means, what this option means is that, when I'm reading A, if I'm a reader and I want to read the value of A, I will have to go to two separate machines. Get the value of A from both of them and then pick the latest one. So, if I read the same value from both of the machines, let's say I go to M2 and M3. If I read the same value, there is usually, all of these systems usually have timestamps. So, when I get the value, I also read a timestamp. If it's the same timestamp for both of them, so it's the same value, I'm done. If they are different, I pick the latest one. So, whichever one is the later one. So, I'm doing extra work now for reading. In the option one, a read only needed to go to one machine. Now, I'm going to two machines. The benefit is that the writes also only have to go to two machines. So, when I'm writing, I don't do a distributed transaction across all three of them. I pick any two, basically whichever one I can get access to the fastest. Let's say I pick M1 and M3 and I update it in M1 and M3. I will send an update to M2 also but I don't wait for the M2 update to be finished. I'm okay. As long as two of them say we got the update, I'm good. So, this is called a quorum system. And these are very common in distributed systems. So, it's a quorum protocol. We have a quorum of two for read and a quorum of two for write. And as long as I read from two machines and I guarantee writes to two machines, my quorum, effectively I will always get the latest value. It will still give me consistency. So, this can be quite helpful in many settings. And if I have N machines and also there is option three which is read go to all machines, write goes to a single machine. This is not particularly desirable for many reasons but it is an option. So, any combination of these numbers works as long as the total there is more than N. If N is the number of machines, total number of machines or total number of copies, a quorum works as long as the sum of this and this is more than N. So, in this case 4 is enough. So, this is an example where read goes to 1, write goes to 3. So, I have 4, 2 plus 2, read goes to all 3, write goes to 1. So, that's again 4. And so, that's the sum of what we talk about. We don't really talk about quorum systems too much right now. It's kind of implicit in some of our discussion that we follow. But quorum systems are quite common out there. Because they reduce the latency for writes. It's the writes that are problematic. In this one, the write is problematic. Because in order for me to write A, I have to write it in 3 locations. And I have to wait for those writes to succeed. That's a lot of latency. This allows me to avoid that by only requiring writing to 2 machines. Any questions? Does this make sense? Distributed transaction is a pretty complex topic. So, we only cover some very basics of it. But this is definitely one of the more important basics of it. So, that is the main thing I wanted to talk about. We talked about failures. One of the benefits of the quorum system is that it's a little bit more robust to the network failures. For instance, if one machine goes down and if I were in... If let's say M1 goes down, for whatever reason it goes down, this protocol basically completely blocks any writes. Because the write has to succeed on all the machines. If M1 is down, it cannot succeed on M1. Which means that a write will never succeed. Okay. And then, if there is a write, that basically just blocks. Until M1 comes back up. This is a little bit more robust. There are two machines that are still available. So, reads and writes can continue. Okay. Whereas in this one, or the option 3, a network failure or a machine failure is problematic. Alright. So, let me switch back to the other slides. If there are no questions. Transactions. You know. Okay. Alright. So, distributed transactions. You know. Okay. Distributed transactions. Again. To. Review that same material. We have a distributed database system or a distributed system in general. Consists of. Sort of. These machines are loosely connected. But that are geographically not co-located. And because of this. Because of replication. Even updating a single data. It doesn't have to be a single data. So, we have to do that. So, we have to do that. So, we have to do that. Even updating a single data item. Can lead to. Updating. Having to update many copies. Okay. We already talked about this. In this literature. We don't really talk about tuples. We just talk about data items. Or objects. Because. Again. As with transactions. The. Concepts here are more general. They apply to distributed databases. They apply to distributed object stores. They apply to S3. They apply to. File systems. They can apply to all of those. Okay. Alright. So, now. Focusing specifically on the distributed transactions. And how it works. So, what we are going to do is. We are going to cover one protocol. In a little bit of detail. And that's about it. Okay. There are many different protocols out there. We will cover one protocol. And that protocol is called. Two phase commit. It's the easiest protocol to understand. It's really not too complicated. It looks more daunting than it really is. And the terminology that we will use. Will be the database terminology. The terminology in the systems literature. Is little bit different. So. But we are sticking with the database terminology. So, in the database terminology. We. For every machine. We kind of have two separate entities. That perform slightly different roles. Okay. So, there is a transaction coordinator. Who is responsible for coordinating. The distributed transaction. And then there is a transaction manager. Which actually does the work. Okay. Which takes care of. Recovery. Takes care of. The locking issues. And all of that. They may not. Be separate processes. They might actually be the same thing. That's acting in dual role. Okay. For logical. Sort of explaining this. Is. The logical. Is. The logical. Is. The logical. Is. The logical. Is. The logical. Is. The logical. Because. That's what the. Context. Is. The logical. Is. The logical. Is. He. The logical. Is. Is. bait. Is. Is. Disapplication. Is. Is. Is. Is. The. The. Are. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. failures happening but our failures now are more complicated which is why this whole sort of literature is becomes very very sort of complex and sophisticated is because we have more complicated failures and these failures are not sort of the failures that are happening in centralized systems they are unique to the distributed setting. So one issue is failure of a site a machine could just go down okay I have n machines a machine could just go down okay how do I deal with that anytime and it could go down at any time okay. Lots of messages we may we cannot guarantee that a message will survive communication from one machine to another. Protocols like TCP IP can take care of it so we don't worry about it but when you are building a system overall system like the entire top to bottom stack of this you do have to make sure that you are dealing with loss of messages okay. We are going to ignore that because we assume that it's handled by something like TCP IP but it is something that we need to consider that a message that is sent from one machine to another doesn't get to the other machine okay. Networks lose messages all the time. So a communication link might fail so if we have a sort of like a routing route through the network a specific route might fail. Again we don't deal with this I mean this is again handled by network protocols if a link fails you cannot just route around it and there is lot of work in networking on that so we are not going to worry about that. Network partition is something we are going to worry about. A network is considered partition if two computers cannot talk to each other. They are both alive but they cannot talk to each other okay. In most cases this happens because of a single node. So in most cases this happens because there is a single node right. So you have a going back here you have a situation where suddenly this complete link here breaks down. And so you have a situation where the server in San Francisco is alive all of these servers are alive they can talk to each other but they can't talk to the server. So that's a network partition. Network partition means that you have groups of computers that cannot talk to each other. And so the protocol needs to decide what to do in these cases. Okay because you have a distributed transaction that you want to do and suddenly you are not able to reach a part of the network then what happens. So that is something that has to be handled. Generally speaking a network partition and a machine going down you cannot really distinguish between them. So if I go back to this example here this machine needs to contact this machine but it's not able to contact it. Is it because this machine is down or the network is down. You can't really tell which is the case. So the protocols that we design have to be robust to that situation. Any questions by the way so far? Make sure the basic setups are here are clear. In the next couple of slides we will get into the actual protocol which you know does will basically spend most of our time on one or two slides beyond this. Commit protocol is I have been using the word protocol already but this is the sort of the mechanism that we have which guarantees that a transaction properly commits. So the main guarantee that we want to provide is atomicity. Remember we have the acid properties. Atomicity is what we are primarily going to talk about and durability also to some extent. Isolation we are not going to worry about that's a separate issue. Currently our goal is that a transaction that is trying to execute against multiple machines it either is committed at all the machines or it's not committed at any. So we cannot have a situation where a transaction commits on one side and does not commit on other side. So I don't have an example here but I can try to draw one on the fly if I can find the paper. So this is a situation where for instance imagine that I have a let's use a replication example. replication of A and so I have a same situation M1 with a copy of A, M2 with a copy of A, M3 with a copy of A. So my distributed transaction is that all three copies are, so they can be written out like this update M1.A. So I am just using the notation a little bit update M2.A update M3.A. So that's kind of how I see my transaction is to update all of them to be the same value. So in a sense I am updating this, this and this. Whether they are the same data item that's replicated or different data items, it doesn't really matter. So atomicity basically means that all three changes have happened or none of them have happened. I can't have something in between. Now in this protocol we are also going to assume the existence of a disk as usual. And again as with the recovery work, we are going to assume that the disks do not fail. The disk failures are handled separately. So what does it mean for the update of A2 have happened? It means that the update and the commit record has gone here. So what I need is that let's call this the transaction T1. I need a T1 commit, T1 commit and T1 commit. So my commit status is that all three disks have a T1 commit record. So all of them have the update of A or none of them do. I should not be in a state as well. I should not be in a state as well. Some of them have a T1 commit record and some of them don't. Because I need all of the transactions to have succeeded. So any thoughts on how to solve this by the way? Does anyone know how I might guarantee something like this? Because remember I'm trying to guarantee a commit across multiple machines that may fail at any point. That there might be a network partition at any time. And I have to have the strict guarantee that the transaction either commits on all of them or on none of them. So you have to, of course, develop the protocol a bit more. So I don't know, but if I understand what you're saying, when the machine succeeds, it sends, when T1 succeeds in sort of writing the commit out, it sends a message to all of the others. But then what happens if one of the other machines has actually failed in the meantime? And it wants to abort. So if the machine fails during the execution of a transaction, first of all, just to make the assumptions clear, any of the sites at any time can say abort on their own. But all of them have to say commit. I guess, for example, like M1 would need to hear from M2 and M3 and M2 would need to hear from M1 and M3. So they pretty much need to wait for success from every other machine. So which one sends success message first? Just whenever it's done. But then if one machine sends a success message, but the other machine never responds, then what do you do? So I think you probably have to develop this on the paper a little bit, but yeah, that's the way we want to think about this. Yeah, I was just going to say, I think this is basically what he's saying, but if you stage the change or whatever, and you know, like you would know how many other machines are on the network, or if you put the change up to be committed or whatever, and then upon receiving success from everything, from every other, like upon receiving confirmation that each other machine has also staged it for committing, you actually Right, so here's the counter example. So you have three machines, two of them decide they are ready to commit, they send success messages out. Okay. The third machine gets those two success messages. But before it's able to send its own message out, it caches. Okay. Now the first two machines are just waiting, because they need to hear from the last machine. Okay. What happens there? Right. Now I'm not asking you to solve this on the fly. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, there's different, and this won't be comprehensive, but that's the kind of thinking that you need to do here to ensure that, that the protocol that you're coming up with is, is wide, is valid. Okay. The staging part is actually accurate. We call it pre-commit. So you will see the word pre-commit. Pre-commit is like staging. Okay. Where you kind of say that, okay, I'm ready, but I am waiting. Okay. And, and that one is, is, can be used to, to get this protocol. Does anyone else want to say something before I jump into action protocol? No, but that's good. This is kind of how we want to think about it. So in our protocol, we assume the existence of a coordinator. So we, we actually get the, get this whole thing started by the coordinator, rather than by the, by the, by the, by the, each of the machines themselves. So there's a coordinator. We can for now assume that the coordinator is a separate unit, and let's assume it's on machine one. Machine one. Machine one. Then you have a bunch of machines here, M2, M3, and so on. And they all have transaction managers, TMs. Okay. They might have transaction coordinator, but for this specific transaction, M1 is the coordinator. Okay. So the, the first step in the protocol is that M1 decides, sort of M1 needs to get started. So there is different ways it can get started, but at some point it decides that the work is done and it wants to actually look into committing the transaction. Okay. So there are some changes at M2, some changes at M3 and so on. And M1 is now says, let's get ready to commit. Okay. So the first thing it sends, it sends a message called prepare. Okay. So that's the first message that is sent to all of them. Prepare. So prepare can be seen as asking the individual sites whether they're ready to commit. whether they're done. At this point, if any of the machine says, I'm not able to finish the transaction, I'm not able to finish the transaction. So you can see that there's a message that is sent to all of them. Prepare. So prepare can be seen as asking the individual sites whether they're ready to commit, whether they're done. At this point, if any of the machine says, I'm not able to finish the transaction, the machine can unilaterally decide to abort. Okay. And once one machine has decided to abort, that is a binding decision. So each of the machine makes a decision and sends a message back. So the message is going to be either an abort or prepare. Oh, sorry. It's going to be a yes or a no. Okay. So the message is going to be a yes or a no. Okay. Now, remember the write ahead logging principle. Before you do something, you should always write out the record of what you did. That is really important. Because the fact that you voted yes is something that needs to be recorded in your own history. And this machine can crash after sending yes. So that's problematic. Okay. So before sending yes, this machine needs to write out the log record. Okay. So corresponding to the yes, this machine writes out a prepare log record. Log record. And in... Again, all of this is just for that one transaction. Okay. All this work is happening for one transaction. Let's keep that in mind. So for every transaction, this is happening. Okay. So in a distributed system, when you go to any of Google services, Google's... Many of Google services are served by a system called Spanner. Spanner is doing the fancy version of this protocol, more complex version of this protocol for every update. Okay. So, at this point, we can imagine the scale at which a system like Spanner is working. Millions and millions of distributed transactions happening per minute. Maybe I don't know the exact numbers. But very large number of distributed transactions. For every transaction, it's running a protocol that's a more sophisticated version of this protocol. So, in particular, they run some version of Paxos, which we are not going to talk about in this class. Okay. So, at this point, every machine has sent a message yes or no. And more importantly, they have written out the log records. Okay. That's important. Okay. Or not. You know, they might have crashed. It doesn't really... Like a crash is essentially a no vote. Okay. Now, the coordinator gets the no votes or yes votes, whatever. Okay. Based on that, it makes a decision of whether to... So, this is M1. Based on the messages, it sends the third round. The third round is going to be commit or abort. So, this is M1's decision based on the yes-no votes it received. If it received all the yes votes, then it will send a commit message. Even a single no vote, it sends an abort message to everyone. Okay. And then finally, M2 will... M2 will then write out the commit or... Commit log record or the abort log record. Again, for just this transaction. And then we'll send an acknowledgement back. Okay. And that's it. Okay. This... This protocol actually works. It's not particularly efficient. That's when no one really uses it anymore. It was a protocol that was common in 90s. People continued using it in 2000s. But at some point, it has some limitations that I'll talk about. But, you know, this is a protocol that sexually we can understand it. And so, that's why I discussed it in class. Okay. So, four rounds of messages. There is a prepare, then a yes-no, then a commit abort, and then an act. Okay. So, now, the question is, how do we guarantee that this works? Okay. So, any questions on the protocol? No. So, the main difference from what either of you talked about was the discussion of log records. That's actually important because that's how the machine remembers what it voted. Okay. Now, some of the questions come up. Okay. So, like for instance, what happens if after the machine, after the coordinator sends prepare messages, it does not get any message back from a machine. Then what happens? Okay. So, coordinator, actually, let me show this on the slide. I think it's a little bit easier to understand. I don't know how much you can follow this. Okay. Okay. So, that's the protocol. We have the coordinator and subordinate. And star means that this is a forced log record to guarantee write higher login. Okay. So, you do not send the message before you write it out on disk. Okay. Now, we have to discuss what happens in different cases. For instance, what if the coordinator never hears back from one machine? What should it do? What should it do? What should it do? Okay. So, it got yeses from nine out of ten machines, but the tenth machine never responded. Okay. So, the simple answer here is that the coordinator at any point, until this point, can essentially decide to abort. And so, at that point, if it doesn't hear back from a machine altogether, it simply decides to abort and sends out an abort message to everyone. Okay. Is it just like a constant time out in seconds? More or less, yeah. Some sort of a heartbeat, you know. You can have a… most of the systems have some notion of a heartbeat. So, you can have… the coordinator keeps track of which machines are alive. And if it's not able to reach a machine, it might wait for a certain period of time. Okay. Lot of tunable parameters in this, like you can decide how much to wait and all that. And no single answer. Now, here's a more interesting one. What happens if a subordinate sends the prepare message and then it crashes? Okay. Now, assuming that all the machines sent the yes vote, the coordinator now has decided to commit. But, when the coordinator tries to reach this machine back out, and then remember the steps here are the coordinator decides to commit, coordinator sends out the commit message to everyone and everyone commits. Except, coordinator is not able to reach a machine. Okay. Now what? Now, the challenge here is that coordinator has already announced the commit decision, which means that all the other nine machines have committed. And remember the requirement for commit we have, we cannot undo a commit. A commit is done as in done. Right? So, nine machines have committed, one machine said it's ready to commit by voting yes, but it's now not reachable. What should I do in this case? You can't because this is my communication. In this protocol, that's the end of the communication. Yeah. So, the commit message has gone out. See, this thing about waiting, you can't make it work. You have to write it out more carefully, but people waiting on each other doesn't work. Yeah. That's an endless loop. Because you're waiting so you hear back from them but now are they waiting on you to acknowledge, and then if they're waiting on you to acknowledge, then are you going to wait for them to acknowledge your act? It doesn't really work. Yeah. That's the way you want to think about it, but the simple protocols, that's the way you want to think about it, but the simple protocols, it's not. It's not. I mean, you're going to be thinking about, you're just going to be thinking about you. on you to acknowledge then are you going to wait for them to acknowledge your act like it doesn't really work. That's the way you want to think about it but the simple protocols don't work. This is in many ways the simplest protocol that you can come up with to solve this problem. So coming back, coordinator sent out a commit message, 9 machines have committed, 1 machine which had originally voted yes is currently unreachable. Now what we are assuming here is that these machines are only temporarily lost, they are not permanently lost. Eventually this machine will, the 10th machine will come back up. Now it comes back up, it does its own recovery. The same algorithms we talked about so far will by and large work. So it does its recovery. Now it's going through this particular transaction, it knows it has executed some instructions, it sees the prepared record which means that it knows it voted yes. So at this time it has to go back and ask the coordinator, hey what happened to this transaction. And then the coordinator says it's a commit and then it goes ahead and commits. So not a problem. So in other words the coordinator has to remember that essentially be able to respond like 2 days later the machine might come up and say hey I had voted yes on this transaction, what actually happened with this transaction. And this could happen 2 days later. Who knows. But it doesn't cause a problem with the protocol, the protocol still works. So what if the, so everyone wrote out prepare in their own log records and again the point here is that the prepare record was written to disk so that's why I can do this. It's really important that before I vote yes the prepare record is written. If those two are flipped I have a problem. If I vote yes but I do not write the prepare record then I don't know what to do once I come back up. What if everyone votes prepare and then the coordinator itself is unreachable. Now that's a situation that two phase commit does not handle very well. No problem, no correctness problem but performance wise because they have voted prepare they cannot do anything except wait. Because they have already voted yes now it's up to the coordinator to tell them whether the decision is commit or abort. If the coordinator is not reachable they will just wait. So this protocol blocks on the coordinator. If the coordinator goes down then the whole protocol blocks. There is no way to progress. The Paxos does not have this problem. That's why in modern systems we don't use two phase commit we use Paxos. Because Paxos does not have this problem with the coordinator. When you have thousands and thousands of transactions going on relying on a single coordinator even if the coordinator is different for every transaction is problematic. So Paxos does not have a coordinator at all in some ways. What are the other situations? So let's see. This is okay. So again this just goes into detail of what happens. Some of these slides are just more like nodes than slides. So when a site recovers for a transaction if it sees commit T nothing to be done, abort T nothing to be done, ready is same as prepare. So if it sees a ready message, a ready log record, it has to consult the coordinator. If there are no log records at all for a transaction, like you have some log records but no commit abort or ready, you can unilaterally abort. So you never said yes, so it doesn't matter, you can just abort. And as it says here, the major problem that two phase commit has is that if a coordinator fails, you are kind of blocked on the coordinator. You cannot do anything. Honestly that is it with this protocol. It's a relatively simple protocol. It works, especially in the common case when the machines don't fail, if that's your situation that machines typically don't fail, this actually works out pretty okay. It's not very commonly used because the blocking on the coordinator is a sufficiently big problem. But otherwise the protocol itself works just fine. And there are in fact some optimizations to it. There is a paper that we used to read in our graduate data v6 class on some simple optimizations to this protocol that work really well. Any questions? This whole literature can be very fascinating if you like this kind of thinking because figuring out when the protocols work, when they don't work, reasoning through them can be really interesting puzzles. So network partitions, if a coordinator and all the participants remain in the partition, nothing changes. But if the network partitions, the coordinator and the participants, you sort of, the protocol itself works out but you might end up blocking quite a bit. So everything works but you know, this protocol, two-phase commit is really not very resilient to the coordinator getting blocked off from the participants. Participants getting blocked off from each other, they actually don't even talk to each other. So we don't care about the participants or the individual machines talking to each other. But the coordinator not being able to talk to each other. But the coordinator not being able to talk to the machines, that pretty much blocks the protocol, depending on what stage you are in. Two-phase commit was proposed in the 80s sometime. I'm pretty sure it's a relatively old protocol. I don't know the exact origin of this but definitely before 90. Three-phase commit was proposed at some point to handle the failure of a coordinator which adds another phase to handle that. It basically rotates the coordinator. But the most common protocols that are used today are the Paxos and the Raft protocols. Paxos papers can be really difficult to read because they don't use the same terminology that we are talking about. But if you stick with it and go through it, you can kind of get to understand it. It takes some time to understand this protocol. Trying to understand Paxos was probably one of the hardest systems papers that I have read. Like properly understand. I tried to teach it once in a graduate class. And it was a struggle to fully understand this protocol. But I felt like I got it at the end of it. Both Paxos and the Raft is a newer variation of it. They cast themselves as a consensus problem. The consensus problem is that you want to get a collection of machines or a collection of distributed entities or processes to choose a value. So it's not really that you are necessarily choosing about a commit. But you are trying to choose a value. And you can see the transaction commit as a special case of error. But the overall protocol is written to solve the consensus problem. Like how do you get multiple machines to reach a consensus on something. So it's very widely used. Some variation of it. Either Paxos or Raft or there is another variation of it. Those are very widely used in practice today. The systems like Spanner, Aurora, which is Amazon's relational database service or maybe not Aurora, maybe DynamoDB. They all use some variation of this Paxos scheme. The 624 covers it. If you are interested in topics like this, 624 I believe goes into some detail on these protocols. Any questions? I actually have one last slide at this point. So I am asking again. The other problem that you will see that is very closely related to this and often times you see an overlap in the research is the cryptocurrencies one. Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum. They have a very similar problem. They are also in some ways trying to solve a consensus problem. Like same as Paxos in some ways. But there is a different problem with these. These schemes have to deal with malicious participants. So Paxos doesn't work with malicious participants. Paxos actually requires the participants to be honest. The other problem here is that you need to assume you have a much larger number of entities. So things like Paxos don't scale to that. So instead of that, the techniques like Bitcoins and Cryptocurrencies, they use essentially some sort of proof of work. If you are familiar with Bitcoin. I assume many of you are somewhat familiar with Bitcoin. But basically, these protocols assign everyone a hard problem. And whoever solves that problem first gets to become the leader. So the leader gets to choose. So they solve the consensus problem not by getting everyone to agree on the answer, but they solve it by essentially making it so that only one person can choose. And that person effectively becomes a leader and that person gets in the case of Bitcoin that whoever solves the puzzle first gets to choose the next block. But there is still some issues with it. Like two different entities could solve the puzzle at the same time in different locations. So there is also this question of whose solution actually wins. But in any case, they are also in some ways trying to solve the same problem of consensus, but their solution is very different. It's based on this proof of work. Anyway, I wanted to put it up there. I think I added this when cryptocurrencies was kind of the hottest topic before AI took over. I probably added this like three years ago when crypto was the talk of the town. I don't think anyone cares that much anymore. But still, if you ever get deeper into this topic, you will see some bunch of connections between these cryptocurrencies and the problem they are solving and the transactions that we talk about. Any questions on any of this? We still have 20 minutes. Any other questions anyone else has? Any random questions about any of the topics we discussed or did not discuss? I kind of figured that this would take us the whole class so I didn't really prepare anything else. But if someone has thoughts on something we can discuss, I am happy to discuss. One topic that I had thought of talking about was, if we were doing the Monday class, the next class was vector databases. How many of you know about vector databases? How many of you know, how many of you have heard the word vector databases? That's actually a surprisingly small number of you. I am honestly a little surprised that you have not even heard that word. It's been a pretty hard topic for the last 2-3 years because of the AI stuff. Of those who know what a vector database is, do you want to take a quick stab at explaining what it is? And what problem it solves? And why we care so much? You can pick any of those three questions. If you ask like a bunch of text documents or something, you might be able to find a query to see what matches in the documents. Normally it's like hard to do, but you can like take a vector embedding of what's in the document and then take the vector embedding of what's your query and find which vector is closest and how it would be similar to you. There's a lot of, you're right mostly, but I'm not sure anyone else followed that. But, go ahead. So my understanding is you encode information as vectors rather than as like print-text data or some other kind of hard-coded data and you compare the vectors to do queries and then to kind of like speed up or optimize queries. Okay. I mean, roughly speaking, yes, I'm trying to get to something that I can explain. Give me just one second here. Okay. I'm just trying to see if I have any slides at all somewhere on this topic. But otherwise I can do it on board. I can do it on the, on paper. Yeah. Let's just forget that. Actually, let me stop this recording here because this is not going to be useful. I did it on the floor on my podcast. Right. The most Rmarks could be useful. I had to stop this recording here because there may be ANY good. The most Rmarks might be unofficial ... It did not work so, I probably went one. But there's a sense of, 아닌 monogic, involved in Noble. I have to put that audio from Snapchat. It doesn't work here. There's a lot to do.

