 So the next topic for us is transactions. We'll start with a brief overview of what transactions are and some controls for them in databases and then we'll jump into the details of a bunch of different things in there. Some of this we have covered before so it's more of a refresher. Transactions are about updates. You want to update the data. A transaction is sort of something that's usually a sequence of actions. So here are some of the examples we have seen in one of the previous classes. Insert into students values. That's a transaction. Update instructor where salary is increased by 3%. Check how many students are currently enrolled and then if we have space, add a new student to the course. Note that this whole thing is a transaction. This one combines a query with an if condition with an update. This one has many updates because you're updating all the tuples of the instructor relation. That one, depending on how many values I have, either it's a single tuple or multiple tuples. But the reason to discuss this is that some of these transactions are updating the entire relation. This one has a mix of queries and updates. You might have this one. Remove the prerequisite of 351 and add a new prerequisite which is something we did about 10 years ago for 422. Add a new section. This section also has multiple updates. You want to add a tuple in sections, a tuple in teaches. Switch the advisor for a tuple for a student. Remove a section that has multiple updates. So all of these are examples of what we call transactions. And the properties we need from transactions. Once you think about it, they become very clear. One is that I need the property of atomicity. Atomicity means that the entire transaction is treated as a unit. Which is fine for this. This is not such a big deal. With this one, it's updating thousands of instructors. How do I make sure that all of them are updated as a unit? The disk doesn't support that. The disk doesn't support that. The disk doesn't allow me to update multiple entries across multiple blocks as a unit. A single page, it allows me to update as atomically. But it doesn't allow me to update multiple pages atomically. It's just not an operation that disk supports. You have to write pages one by one. The problem I have to write. If half of the instructors have their salary increase and half don't, that's a problem for me. So that's the atomicity guarantee I need. We will see examples of all of this. But before we... actually let's just see through examples. So the other problem I have is contention between different transactions. Let's say two different students execute the same transaction at the same time. Both of them ask to be inserted into or they ask to be added into this section of 424. So this is the transaction we run for it. We check how many enrolled are there. If enrolled is less than capacity, we add the student in there. The problem is these instructions are potentially interleaved at the server. So both of these transactions might see enrolled value of 49 with a capacity of 50. So both of them might see 49. For both of them, the if condition satisfies and both of them go ahead with instruction. So if they are interleaved. So if this happens afterwards, the if condition will fail. But because they are interleaved, it's possible that both if conditions succeed. So this is sort of a race condition that I have to worry about. What if two different students try to enroll at the same time. For performance reasons, we don't want to restrict things so that they happen one after the other. For performance reasons, we do need to let them interleave. Which means that we need to figure out how we are going to solve this problem. So that's not very different. It's not very different from synchronization. If you have done programming language style courses before. What if only part of the transaction is happening. All of these transactions are multi-step transactions. What if this gets deleted and this doesn't get inserted? What am I supposed to do? What if the student is, the section is deleted from, what if the, in deleting the section, the take sentries are deleted and the teacher sentries are not deleted? What if it is, what if it is, what if it is deleted? We are kind of an inconsistent state and we need to make sure we somehow fix it. So these requirements and a couple of other requirements have been, they are often called ACID properties. The acronym was designed back in the 70s when these problems were all laid out first time. And a solution was proposed in a seminal paper in 1975. And ACID properties, which acronym actually has a minor problem with it, but still it's a very common acronym. Says atomicity is an entire transaction on nothing. Isolation means that even if I have two transactions that are running simultaneously, they appear to run in isolation. It means that they don't interfere with each other. Durability means that if I do commit a transaction, with a commit being a specific technical word, then the effects of it are not lost. The situation you have to remember here is that the transaction finished, let's say you went to an ATM, you withdrew the cash and transaction finished, but then the system crashed and now your transaction is not there in the system. You might be happy, but the bank is not going to be happy with that because they lost money effectively. You withdrew the money, but there is no record of it. That's not allowed. Now consistency is a bit weird one because consistency is not a guarantee that the database provides. It's probably was put in there primarily to make the acronym work, but consistency basically says as defined, it says that a transaction takes the database from one consistent state to another. But that's more of a, that's more stating an assumption than a requirement. It's not a requirement. At least it's not a requirement on the database. The transaction programmer has to guarantee. Within the transaction, if you were to make data inconsistent, the database really can't do too much. So consistency is not a database systems guarantee. There is some things you can do, but not really much. The rest of them, atomicity, isolation and durability are guarantees that databases need to provide. And that's kind of what we're going to talk about. And it's pretty challenging problem. People write papers on transactions even today and they don't just write it, they actually have practical impact. Like they're still getting implemented and all of that. Any questions by the way so far? Okay. So we'll go through some definitions first. And then we'll start talking about, because we need some foundations to build up on top of. The first definition we have is that of a schedule. Okay. So a schedule is, a schedule the way we draw it looks something like this. And this kind of format is pretty common in this literature. So it shows the exact operations that happen. The atomic operations that happen. Like the instructions that are executed by the database systems on the data in sort of detail. Okay. So we have two transactions we'll worry about. T1 is transfer 50 from A to B. T2 is transfer 10% from A to B. So this is what the transactions look like. You read A, A minus 50, write A. So write the value back. Read B, write B back. Read A, take 10%, subtract, add the 10% into B. Okay. Note that we assume here that there is a one copy of A that we are reading and writing from. Okay. This is an important assumption, which we'll see that some techniques don't require this assumption. But ultimately there is a single copy of A. The main assumption here is that these operations are directly against that copy. Okay. Some techniques don't, they sort of operate on a private copy. But in this case these operations are on the actual data objects directly. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. If values of A and B were 150 before, afterwards there will be 45 and 105. Okay. You can work out the map. But that's the final value. And note that we have a constraint here. A plus B is constant. Think of this as checking and saving account. And both of these transactions maintain that constraint. Okay. So if whatever A plus B was before, it remained A plus B after. Because these two transactions don't, they only transfer data, transfer money across the two accounts. Okay. Any questions so far? Now, there is another schedule. Let's say we have interleaving of operations. The two transactions happened simultaneously. The instructions got interleaved. So we now have this block of T1, then this block of T2, then this block of T1, and then this block of T2. The question for us is, is this schedule okay? Well, it turns out this one is okay as well. Because the effect here is the same as the previous transaction. So in some ways, if we ended up with an interleaving like this, we are not concerned about it. We are okay with it. Okay. Because the effect here is the same as the effect we saw last time. So this particular concept that the effect of a schedule is same as the effect of that previous schedule is often called serializability. Okay. So serializability is one of the key technical words in this space. The definition of serializability is that a schedule like this across many transactions potentially, is considered serializable if the final effect is same as that of one of the serial schedules. Okay. So for instance, here there are two serial schedules. Okay. So for instance, here there are two serial schedules. You know, I have T1 happening before T2 or I have T2 happening before T1. By definition, both of those are okay. The final effect is not the same. But by definition, both of those are acceptable schedules. If for another schedule, if it is possible, then the final effect is not the same. Here there are two serial schedules. I have T1 happening before T2 or I have T2 happening before T1. By definition both of those are okay. The final effect is not the same but by definition both of those are acceptable schedules. If for another schedule, if its effect is the same as one of those two then it is called serializable. So this one is serializable because the effect of this schedule is same as the one that we saw before T1 and then T2. This schedule is not serializable because if I were to work out this schedule, so what happened in this schedule was that the write A sort of there is a gap between the read part and the write part and the rest of T2 is in here and same is two for read B and write B. They sort of got separated by these instructions. If you work out the effect of this transaction, this schedule, you end up with a final answer of 50-60. And this one we obviously already know that this is bad because these don't add up to 150. And it's not equivalent to any serial schedule because any serial schedule will guarantee that these two add up to the same number that they started with. And it doesn't matter if I have more transactions, it will be the same effect. So this is not consistent. Any questions so far? Sorry. fut damals do you think, youели okay. I can see that. Can you Bj néme say that asking, can you . No, can you say that pick you 附加 sul向 cost, is it the center of the end or both the port that we have the same to over the world? The final state of the database is the same. So in this case, we only have two objects we have horrifying. So the final values of those two objects are the same as that of some serial schedule. We have one more example here. Hopefully that will make it a bit more clear. So here is an example with three schedules. Or two schedules. Three transactions, two schedules. And as before, I have A equal to 100 and B equal to 50. And if I try to work out the schedules, I won't ask you to do it right now because I wasn't really fully prepared for that. But if you work out the numbers, you will see that this schedule is problematic whereas this one is okay. So this schedule, the final effect is going to be the value of A will go from 100 to 50, 50 to 45, and 45 to 65. And the value of B will go to 105. So you end up with 65 and 105, something like that. Whereas that schedule, you will end up with a bit of a mess because of the way, first of all, those two schedules are not identical. But something gets cut off here? That's weird. I guess ignore this part for now. Oh, okay, okay. So that wasn't the goal of this assignment. It was only to just make sure we understand how to read these things. So in this case, the final result of A and B is 65 and 105. In this case, we have a little bit more messy situation. Here A goes to 50 from 100 to 50 and it's written out here. So the final write to A is 50. That's here. In between this write that happened to A that effectively ignored, because this last write sort of takes over. And that last write is based on these instructions. So the value of A at the end is going to be 50. Whereas value of B, you can compute it similarly. Now this schedule is not going to be serializable. I don't have to work out the numbers, but the interleaving is obviously very problematic. This schedule is going to be perfectly fine. And how do we decide that? That's kind of the sort of the goal of the serializability part. Why is this schedule okay? This schedule not okay. Any questions so far? Is this making sense? And again, something that students get confused about is where are these instructions coming from? So the way to think about this is that this is like we let something happen in the system and then we look at what happened. Okay. And then we decide whether that was acceptable or not. So this is more of a conceptual tool to develop good algorithms. It's not a way to, we are not going to let this schedule happen and fix it in a production system. This is more to understand the space of possibilities and to design the concurrency control algorithms that work. Okay. That's really our goal with this theory of serializability and all of that. Ultimately, we would like our schedules to be serializable. That's our goal. Okay. That's kind of a hard goal. A lot of systems do not try to go for serializability because it's just too expensive to guarantee it. But that's the ultimate goal is serializability. We want our schedules to be serializable. Okay. There is another way to look at it. How do you decide if something is serializable or not? The simplest algorithm given a schedule, the simplest way to tell whether the schedule is serializable or not is to look at the read and write instructions and reason about what's the appropriate schedule that this might be equivalent to. We try to see if there is a serial schedule, this schedule is equivalent. So one thing we can see for instance is that there is a write A and there is a read A after that. So in some sense, T2 read the value of A that was written by T1. Okay. Which means that in an equivalent serial schedule, T2 must come before T1. And we draw that with an arrow like this. What this says is that T1 must appear before T2 in the equivalent serial schedule. Like because these read and writes are the key to that. The T1 wrote a value of A and T2 read that which means that there is no way for me to flip the order of those two. Okay. If I flip the order of these two, my final effect is going to be different. And so if my goal is to find a serial schedule that this is equivalent to, the serial schedule must have T1 before T2. T2 before T1 will not be allowed. In general. There are exceptional cases, but in general it's not allowed. Similarly, similarly I can see that T3 read a value of A and after that T1 wrote a value of A. If T3 were to happen after T1, the effect will not be the same. Okay. Because if T3 were to happen after T1, T3 would have read a different value of T1. So I again have a constraint that T3 must happen before T1. Okay. I can continue this. I get this read, this write, but it doesn't add a new line. I have this one here, this write and this read. So I get that T5 must be before T4. I don't remember if this schedule has a consistency, concurrency problem. This one is okay. This one is okay. So this one says that this write B and this read B mean that T3 must be before T1. So this is the constraints I get. I don't think I get any more constraint than this. And at this point, the test of serial eligibility is simple to see whether there is a cycle in this. If there is a cycle in this, then I have a problem. Because if this constraints say that T3 must be before T1, then I have a problem. That's what happens in this schedule. Let me erase the ink on this schedule and then we'll stop after this. That's what happens in this schedule. In this schedule, we see that because of this write A and this write A or this read A and this write A, T2 must happen before T1. But because of this write B and this write B T2 must happen after T1. So I get it both ways. One instruction, this read A and this write A say that T2 must be before T1. This write B and this write B say that T1 must be before T2. And there is no way for me to satisfy both those constraints. One of those has to be first in a serial schedule. Either T1 is before T2 or T2 is before T1. This schedule basically says both of them must be true and so it's not serial. It's not serial as well. Alright, so think about this. We'll continue this discussion in the next class with the topic of concurrency control and that will probably take us next couple of classes and then we'll be close to wrapping up this topic. Thank you.