 All right. Let's get started. Before we begin with our sort of next topic, any questions about anything? So, how do we know how the final is moving? Yeah, final, I was probably thinking about, it might be about 40-ish percent on this transactions part and 60 percent on the part before. That will be on the larger side, yeah. Any other questions? Folks? All right. So, just to sort of do a quick review, actually didn't update this part, but we are currently in the last part here of implementation, how to support the asset properties, including in a distributed setting, which we'll talk about later. Once again, the asset properties are, it's an acronym to denote all the things we want from our updates to satisfy the system, the way it supports updates, we want it to satisfy these properties. Atomic City simply says we should do the entire transaction on none of it. Doing a transaction part way is problematic because, you know, if you only update the salaries of half the instructors,
 that's problematic, especially if you can't tell which half you updated. Isolation basically means that we should be allowed to have transactions running simultaneously without interference. Okay, and that's what we're going to talk about today and next class. Durability means that once a transaction is committed, the effects are not lost. Here, our main concern is on system crashes. So if a system crashes in the middle of a transaction or just after a transaction finishes, we need to make sure that whatever the transaction did is made permanent. And in particular, we need to be able to handle a disk crash. Okay, and by disk crash, I mean we lose everything on the disk. So that part we'll talk about probably after the next week's quiz, we'll start talking about that. Okay. So today's first topic focus is on concurrency. Concurrency has been a topic of study in database and systems literature for 50 years now. From the earliest days, people wanted to support multiple transactions
 simultaneously. And immediately the question of how do you guarantee that this won't cause race conditions, race conditions across the transactions comes up? These are not race conditions in the code, right? That we're not worried about. That's a separate problem. We are worried about transactions interfering with each other. Okay, transactions written in SQL interfering with each other. We saw an example last time of this case. So this is a very simple transaction that computes the number of students who are currently enrolled in the course. And then if that number is smaller than the capacity of the room, then you go ahead and or capacity for the course, then you go ahead and add the student into the course. And the race condition here that can happen between these two transactions is that the read query gets executed at the same time by two different transactions. Remember, all of these systems are multi-threaded, multi-processor, multi-processed systems. So multiple transactions
 can be running at the same time. And if both of them get an old value of enrolled, both of them satisfy the condition, but it might be the case that enrolled is one less than capacity. Which means that if you were to order them one after the other, both of them would not satisfy the constraint. If this goes after goes after that one then this if condition will fail and vice versa so that's kind of the race condition that we want to make sure we want to avoid and this was a simple example but in other cases the inconsistency that we introduced in the database could be significant especially in financial transactions you could with race conditions you could end up with a real mess ticketing is another example you know you probably dealt with overbooking potentially in airlines ticket like ticket sales on systems like ticket master for top count like for the hottest concerts you know like millions of people are trying to buy tickets literally for some of these concerts how do you make
 sure that you only sell the right number of tickets not an easy problem to solve especially for someone like ticket master who has many servers across the at least across the United States okay any questions on the problem set up here what would be the easiest way for me to ensure that this doesn't happen yeah what's the first thing you would think of that I would do here which is going to be the first solution we consider as well reject both so it's okay in that itself is not a problem but it's not a solution because an important thing is that both of these are operating sort of independently of each other so we are not we cannot make a centralized decision on rejecting both of them imagine there is one server that's running this transaction against the same database another server that's running this transaction we don't really have a place to sort of detect easily detect that the two of them are potentially conflicting and reject both yeah put a lock so what would you put a lock on
 here like the entire database it's fine it's perfectly fine to start with it my general philosophy with solving any problem is have one solution you start with one solution make sure it works you can improve it after that so a solution that just says only one transaction at a time okay it's perfectly fine you know that's what that's how some some systems some real world systems do work it's not scalable we cannot really allow that but it's a it's acceptable solution that's what that would result in a serial schedule by the way the one we talked about last last time a serial schedule will have no interleaving so two transactions cannot interleave so we always have one transaction take a lock here stop anyone else from entering until the lock is released here okay I saw a couple more hands raised anyone else wants to do I think it's basically very similar to the locking the same full locking approach just a different way to implement it and that again as I said that that's a valid
 solution just not something that we can actually allow as in especially keep in mind the example that I gave of Ticketmaster and a Taylor Swift concert and a Taylor Swift concert and a Ticketmaster is a very similar to the locking approach that I gave to the lock is a very similar to the locking approach that I have to implement it and that again as I said that that's a valid solution just not something that we can actually allow as in especially keep keep in mind the example that I gave of Ticketmaster and a Taylor Swift concert and literally hundreds of thousands of people trying to buy tickets right we cannot put them in a queue the queue will be way too long okay and remember people take time to make a decision more than the time to execute the transaction it's the time to make a decision that's actually more problematic even on slower processors there's a problem because when people are doing a transaction they they go they go in there and then they are choosing tickets and it
 will take them minutes to decide which seats they want and then make a payment so we are talking about minutes here for some one person to make a decision and buy the tickets there's no way to queue them one after the other anyone else so going back to the locking approach what is better that we can do than locking the whole database right so obvious answer is we can take locks on smaller pieces of things right so this transaction is primarily touching touching takes both on the right part and touching takes so we could basically just have a lock on the takes that will simplify things a little bit because now if another transaction wants to run on teachers that transaction can go on even though this transaction will wait on this transaction because this case earlier so this one took a lock on takes does not really need to here so this one cannot continue but another transaction that's on teachers could continue okay so that would work but i can do better than that i could take lock on
 only cmsc 424 okay so i somehow take the lock purely to stop someone from modifying the takes entries for cmsc 424 so not for the entire takes relation but before entering here i take the lock on cmsc 424 inside of takes all the tuples in takes that have to do with cmsc 424 okay or even better cmsc 424 okay or even better cmsc 421 section 201 okay at that point if some other student wants to enroll in cmsc 424 the other section they can go ahead okay that's the basic idea behind lags locking what we're going to talk about today is just the sort of the full implementation of how that really works and the issues that come up there okay you'll find a decent amount of discussion in the paper on this topic to the extent to the extent we cover it it's a pretty basic technique was developed in the papers in in a paper in 1976 and hasn't really changed what we discussed today what we'll discuss today is pretty much all present in fact that paper from 76 has more stuff than we'll discuss
 that's not locking is not locking is not locking is not locking is not locking is not a commonly used approach today so we'll talk about other approaches later lock-based protocols have a fairly simple premise one thing we do is we differentiate between read and write locks so we don't just have one lock but we say that for transaction if a query just wants to read it doesn't need to take it needs to take it can take shared it can take shared locks okay so locks that can be shared between two queries so two and here sharing is we're not sharing the lock per se but the what it means is that on that item two different transactions can have a lock at the same time and it's okay okay both of you want to read fine as many people want to read no problem if someone wants to write then we have a problem yeah so the two locks we have are shared or read those two terms are kind of used very equivalently and exclusive or write okay in the systems literature you typically see read write terms
 being used more the original database terminology was shared and exclusive so we'll stick with that terminology but they are basically equivalent okay so here what the transaction looks like we have one t2 that's a read transaction t1 is a write transaction so it's really more of a a query but we are going to call it also a transaction here so t1 takes a lock on b reads b this is a in-memory modification then it writes it and then unlocks b t1 takes a lock on a does its modifications unlocks a t2 on the other hand takes the shared lock on a reads it shared lock on b reads it and then prints out a plus b okay so what we have done effectively is it required that a transaction must take locks before it does anything if it wants to write it has to take the right lock if it only wants to read it can take the read lock okay now the problem is this doesn't actually work okay by itself so we'll first discuss why it doesn't work let's first discuss what what is locks are now some of you who
 have taken programming languages and some other courses I don't know exactly which course covers this you've seen uh you've seen uh you've seen uh you've seen uh you've had discussion on synchronization blocks and things like that right these are those are at the level of uh those are at the lower level right the synchronization locks and things like that mute access all of that stuff is at the lower level these locks are logical locks they're not physical they're not sort of at the uh level of uh uh the operating system or the file system okay so the way we do it is there is a separate module in these databases like PostgreSQL which still has locking support that is responsible for making decisions on the locks, it keeps track of the locks and it decides whether to grant a lock request or not, it's effectively just a hash table nothing more than that so we use a hash table to keep track of all the locks that are currently held so the hash table will have an entry for every object
 always there is a lock and then with that object we will have the list of locks currently being allowed shared and exclusive locks have a pretty standard interplay between them so for instance if t2 currently has a lock on an item and if t1 wants a lock, whether we allow that or not basically depends on the lock types, so if t2 has a shared lock t1 wants a shared lock we can allow that that's the definition of shared that the locks can be shared but if t2 has a shared lock and wants an exclusive t1 wants an exclusive or t2 has an exclusive we cannot allow those because by definition exclusive locks are exclusive okay so since so so if we want to use an exclusive lock they can't have like they both have to have exclusive for it no if one of them is exclusive then the other one cannot go on or vice versa either way because they want to allow share yeah or allow the concurrent execution so if t2 has an exclusive lock and if t1 wants a lock no matter which one t1 is going to wait t1 is
 going to wait until t2 releases the lock okay and again lock request and lock release are both everything is handled by the concurrency control manager or lock manager okay different terms in different systems now just taking locks is actually not enough okay so here is a sort of a schedule that shows why it's not enough this is the second transaction so what's happening here is p1 took 50 away from b and added it to a okay so standard a plus b is constant type of a setup the problem is there is a time here when t1 does not have a lock on either a or b otherwise it has a lock exclusive lock on b exclusive lock on b but in between here t2 can come in and go ahead and update both a and b okay because here in this space here there is no locks for t2 to stop right so this is t2 yeah so there are no locks for t2 to stop so t2 will go ahead if it's fast enough it can get its locks do some calculation subtract from a subtract from b and lock a this schedule is now not serializable okay it
 ended up in a situation where I don't have the I don't believe I have the numbers here but you can work out the numbers that this schedule is not serializable okay because the value of a plus b that you get is inconsistent so it ends up in a somewhat inconsistent situation so there is no way either t1 followed by t2 or t2 followed by t1 will have the same effect as this schedule okay go ahead so other you said since we have like an exclusive lock power in u and we can't like do it again so we are locking or it unlocked it yeah but we we locked it twice on t2 t2 is doing lock a and b so the word exclusive is about a data item t2 getting multiple exclusive locks is perfectly fine yeah in fact it needs it in many many transactions will need many exclusive locks okay so that that's not the problem here so the problem here is that we had this kind of a place where this t2 could sneak in and do its operations and you know we end up with a non serializable schedule okay so the way we solve
 it it's a clever but simple fix is to require that you never have a situation like this unlock power by unlock and that turns out to solve the problem okay so there is the this protocol now is called two phase locking protocol or 2PL for short and 2PL effectively says that you can never have this happen okay unlock even if there are different items it doesn't really matter unlock followed by a lock and in effect what it means is that your lock and unlock statements happen in two distinct phases in a one phase you keep getting more locks in the second phase you keep releasing locks okay but you never take another lock after releasing one okay so this would not be allowed does the protocol make sense any questions or just the mechanics of the protocol okay not how it guarantees reliability which can be proven relatively easily but the mechanics of what we are doing here any questions on that so the 2PL is a basic protocol that all the locking schemes follow because that's just a good
 idea you can achieve it in multiple ways one option for instance is that T1 can just take all the locks in the beginning and then release them at the end or release them one by one or it can keep taking locks and then only release them at the very end so multiple ways to kind of achieve that goal the standard way to do it is to keep taking locks through the transaction but only do the unlocks at the very end all the unlocks at the very end okay so no unlocks during the transaction main statements but just before finishing you go ahead and unlock all your locks and that works out fine okay what you can show is and I won't I won't try to show this here what you can show is define that define lock point to be the time at which a transaction acquired its last lock okay so this is not a obviously this does not have a lock point well defined lock point but a transaction that follows two phase locking there will be a point at which it would have finished taking locks so we will call that the
 lock point what you can show or what you can see here is that if T1's lock point is before T2 then T1 cannot read any update of T2 and as a result of it you can effectively serialize it with T1 first followed by T2 okay so you can effectively in other words what you can do is the serial for a given schedule the equivalent serial schedule would simply be the lock point order of the transactions and that's it so this guarantees serializability and it's not a particularly cumbersome protocol and has been implemented in the systems for quite a while okay as I said modern systems are not really using locking as much as older system used to use for a variety of reasons but the for 20-30 years locking was kind of a very commonly used protocol in database systems and they all implemented variations of two phase locking so T1 for instance in two phase locking would look something like this takes lock on B takes a lock on A at the very end it unlocks both of them okay so the lock point for this
 transaction would be right here here any questions and so two phase locking guarantees serializability alright so remember we wanted serializability as a requirement for us two phase locking gives that to us okay the reason it's not acceptable in modern systems is it's not it's not great for multi core systems it doesn't have enough good performance and locking has a lot of overhead so we don't use it because of those reasons but it works okay and as I mentioned it was the dominant form of concurrency control mechanism for a for a pretty long time any questions so far on two phase locking now two phase locking guarantees serializability but it does not guarantee something called recoverability so what do I mean by that so imagine this schedule of transactions this is two phase locking compliant so we have three transactions t1 locked a and d did some operations unlocked them t2 locked a updated a unlocked it and committed and t3 did the red a okay now the problem is transactions can
 fail okay until commit a transaction can be going either direction either it can it can succeed in which case it will go ahead and commit or it can fail in which case we will kind of undo all the actions of the transactions everything that the transaction did we can have a serious problem with this scheme here what's happening is that if this transaction fails here we can go ahead and re like rewire all of these operations but what do we do about this one right t2 has already read a value written by a written by t1 and it committed and then t3 actually read the value written by t2 and committed so these are committed transactions okay they cannot be undone we are only allowed to undo non-committed transactions that's a durability requirement and imagine this commit is like a print print of a print out of something right a receipt okay like you can't really undo something that where there is a receipt printed out to the user okay so what do we do right there is no there is no easy
 answer to this question does this setup make sense any suggestions on how we might fix this what would be the first of all okay the problem is clear the question is how do we fix it right or what would be a good fix for it there is no good fix in some ways every every fix has some problem and that will lead us to different solutions okay different directions depending on what we prioritize systems building is a lot about trade-offs and understanding how to sort of live in that space of trade-offs there is no perfect answer most of the time it's a think time imagine that there is a user involved and who is just waiting and thinking this is like imagine that you are trying to call the tickets and you kind of you know add some items to your list and then you are like you are really having enough money to buy a tellers of tickets and then you kind of wait for a few minutes and then you say okay I don't and you cancel it right there is many reasons why delays can happen I think you we
 should accept that like we have to assume that there will be delays there is a line of literature which assumes transactions have zero delays but the standard for our transactional systems that we use in practice is that there are delays which one we are not showing them because they are not important so these are remember that there are many transactions running at the same time there is much intervening we are only showing the instructions that are relevant but it doesn't mean that there is no gap between these two and also these are examples designed to showcase problems so that's why you are going to see the big gap where I need there to be a big gap okay so any thoughts on how we fix this okay so okay so okay so okay so hmm so yeah so T2 can't use the data from T1 unless T1 commits. So, yes, that would be an acceptable solution. The challenge here is that we are assuming that these writes are to global location and T1 has already unlocked A. So, there is no real mechanism to stop
 T2 from now reading the value of A. So, again, we have to remember that each of these transactions is running in its own process or something like that. So, they are making local decisions. And T2's decisions are based on whether, like this lock X was supposed to help us with that decision. And so, T2's decision is based on whether it can get a lock and it can get a lock, so it will go ahead. In effect, we want to achieve what you just said, but right now we cannot achieve that. Can we just not release the lock until it finishes execution? So, the simplest solution here is for T1 not to release the lock unless it has been a decision. Even though this is compliant with two-phase locking, in order to get recoverability, which again, I won't actually define it, but it's basically solving this problem, right? That's what recoverability is. Even though this is compliant with two-phase locking, in order to get recoverability, we are going to require that T1 not release the locks until it
 has made a final decision. In fact, until it has committed or aborted, okay? One out of the two. So, it does basically, the solution to this is T1 does all that, it commits, and then after it commits, it does the unlock. Correct. And so, this situation can never happen because this situation can never happen. The unlock will only happen after the transaction fails. Okay. And as a result of it, the problem, of course, with this is now T1 is holding the lock for a very long time. We haven't gotten rid of this gap itself. Okay. So, now T1 is holding the lock for a very long time, which means that T2 and T3 are just going to be waiting. So, we can't really, we don't, like that's problematic. Like T2 is waiting, not because of anything wrong with T2, it's waiting because T1's user can't make up their mind. So, is there really any, like, an optimal solution for a solution with, we just, every time we find a solution, there's a problem that arrives, like, what is the purpose of this, and why
 is it made of this? Well, that's a great question. It's a kind of question that requires you to think a little bit. Locking was the most natural solution in the earliest systems because of resource constraints. You had limited resources, limited CPU, memory. Locking made the most sense back then. And because of all these problems, you kind of try to come up with ways around them. There are ways around some of these problems. Some you are not. Some there are no ways around. This one, there isn't really an easy way around. One option, by the way, is to let T2 read the older value of A. Okay. Okay. But that requires you to keep the older value of A around. Okay. So, what I mean here is that T2 came in. T1 is still making up its mind about updating A and B. There is no reason why T2 can't be serialized before T1. Remember, there are different transactions. They are coming in separately. There is no global order on these transactions. No one is saying that T1 must happen before T2. We
 could just make it so that T2 happens before T1. So, the way we can do that is by letting T2, instead of reading this sort of the latest value, you let it read the older value. Okay. Make sense? So, that approach is something we are going to cover later. And it's the more commonly used approach today, which is called snapshot isolation. And there is a couple of other ways of doing this also that we are going to cover. But locking is still implemented in systems. And despite these problems, it ends up working relatively okay. This is not a common approach that we are going to have. So, it works out relatively okay. Any other questions on this? So, you can't do this with two-phase locking. I think the previous slide just explained why. So, the strict two-phase locking, the strict part here refers to keeping the exclusive locks until end. You don't actually need to keep the read locks if you have any. So, S here could stay. But A lock, lock X on A, that should not be released. The S lock
 could be released. The X lock should not be released. So, strict 2PL will not allow that unlock here. And this is okay. So, you can go ahead and release B but not A. And that guarantees recoverable schedules. So, strict 2PL is kind of what we would likely end up with. There is one more stricter variation of it. But that's not super important. So, take an example for instance. Would this schedule of four transactions be allowed under strict two-phase locking? Now, the key here is that there is a kind of problem that's there in the homework. It should be there in the homework. I'll confirm. Actually, I haven't released the homework for that. So, yeah. The homework 5, when it will be released, we won't, we're not requiring you to do that. I'm not really requiring you to do any of the homeworks. But homework 5 will have questions like this. You will see that. So, the question is, is this schedule would be allowed under strict two-phase locking? This requires a little bit of thinking
 because you have to figure out when the locks and unlocks will happen. But in this case, under strict two-phase locking, these two unlocks cannot happen to here. What is the point I wanted to make here? Oh, yeah. So, this is problematic. So, this right C here in T4 requires you to have an exclusive lock. That exclusive lock must be held till the end of the transaction. So, in this period, T4 must have had an exclusive lock on C. So, this cannot be permitted. We are, since we are doing both read and write, we take an exclusive lock. We don't need to take both locks. Exclusive lock covers the shared lock, so we don't need both of that. Yes. Yes. Same case for T1. So, P2 has a right lock here. And it will not release it until here at the least. So, this really may not happen. So, one way or the other, this is a schedule that will not be permitted under strict two-phase locking. Okay. There is a variation of strict two-phase locking which is rigorous. All this guarantees is that the order
 in which the transactions commit is the same as the serializability order. That's not necessarily true for the strict two-phase lock. But it's not really an important enough requirement. Lock conversion is allowed under locking schemes. For instance, a transaction might not really know what it wants to update. It might need to read things in order to decide what to update. So, you can do lock upgrades. You can't downgrade because downgrade will be considered as releasing the stronger lock. Okay. But upgrades are okay. So, you can have start with an S-lock and upgrade to an X-lock. It doesn't really change anything. But you cannot start with an X-lock and downgrade to an S-lock. That would not be allowed because a downgrade is like releasing a lock. So, two-phase locking will not allow that. How is locking implemented? As I mentioned, typically the simplest implementation is just a hash table. So, here is a hash table as an example. We ignore this part. There is a lot of detail for you
 to read afterwards. The 17, 123, 19, 12. Think of this as tuple IDs. So, locking happens on items. We are not really defining what an item is. If you want to make it more concrete, you can imagine that an item is a tuple. But the discussion in this whole part is going to be more generic. It doesn't have to be a tuple. In a system like MongoDB, you could be taking locks on documents instead. In a key value store, you could be taking locks on keys. All of this discussion is very general. But either way, 17, 123 there are referring to the keys. And then these here are the transactions. So, what I effectively saying is that T3 has 17. There is a lock. 17 has a lock by T23. 123 has two locks. T1 and T2. And then there is T2. Sorry, T1 and T8. And then there is T2 which is waiting. So, this is a situation where T1 and T8 both have a shared lock. And T2 wants an exclusive lock. And because of that, T2 is going to be waiting. We have a situation here where on 14, T1 has a lock and T23 is
 waiting. So, that's a Q and T10. As, like, once T1 releases a lock, we remove this entry and then give the lock to T23. So, it's a fairly straightforward implementation. And, of course, in modern systems, lock tables are, even in older systems, lock tables are very high contention objects. So, they are implemented very carefully. Okay, they are not, you are not going to use your Java hash table for this. There will be a dedicated implementation of a hash table for locking purposes. Because that's a source of contention. Lot of, every transaction is sending lock requests. So, this module needs to be able to handle that. Any questions? Now, what other problems do we need to worry about with locking? What's a natural problem that you might think of as, what about this? Anytime there is a locking system in place, you need to figure out if there is a possibility of deadlocks.  The deadlock happens when two transactions are waiting on each other. So, here is a very simple example. T1 took a
 lock on X on B, a shared lock, and now it wants to take a lock on A. T2 has a lock on A, but it also wants to read B. So, it also took a lock on B, or it wants a lock on B. Both of these requests cannot be, neither of these requests can be satisfied. This cannot be satisfied right now because T1 has a lock on B, exclusive lock on B. This cannot be satisfied because T2 has an exclusive lock on A. Neither of them can take the next step. So, that's a deadlock. We cannot, system cannot, these two transactions cannot move forward. And they are holding locks. So, not a desirable situation to be in. How do we solve it? So, we are going to look at a few different ways of solving it. But I want to see what all of you think. What are some ways to solve this problem? How do I handle or prevent deadlocks? Much better to prevent. Handling is expensive. Thoughts? So, we will talk about four different ways of doing it. The simplest way is to actually detect them. So, the way you detect them, by the
 way, 2PL does not prevent deadlock. These transactions are 2PL compliant. So, that in itself doesn't really help you. One option is to keep an eye out for deadlocks. So, what you can do is you can draw a graph like this, in which the nodes are transactions. And then you put edges based on if transactions are waiting on each other. So, what this is showing here is that T1 is waiting on T2. So, T1 wants a shared lock on V. T2 has an exclusive lock on V. So, T1 is waiting for T2. T2 is waiting for T4 because T2 wants a shared lock on W. T4 has a shared lock. So, T2 is waiting on T4. T3 is waiting on T2. So, this is called a waits for graph. And now, if T4 requests another lock, T4 currently is the only one that's not waiting. So, it can execute more instructions. And if now T4 asks for a new lock, if T4 asks for a lock on Z, well, we have a problem because T3 has a lock on Z. So, now T4 is going to be waiting on T3. So, at this point, we have a cycle here. So, T2 is waiting on T4. T4 is
 waiting on T3. T3 is waiting on T2. So, none of them. And T1 is just on the side. It's also waiting. None of these transactions can move forward. This, by the way, is a standard problem in any system that has some kind of a mechanism for race conditions. Okay. Like, if you have, how many of you know about, I don't know which course this is covered in, but any of you know what mutexes are? Which course covers it? Is it a programming languages course? Is it a 330? One, whatever. So, mutexes, which stand for mutual exclusion, or semaphores, which is another word for it. They are programming language mechanisms to, or even operating system mechanisms to prevent race conditions. Mutexes are also named. So, you take a mutex on a name, and you can end up with a similar situation like this. So, race conditions, deadlocks can happen in any of these situations. So, what do I do in this case? Well, if you are in a deadlock detection and recovery kind of framework, if that's what you are using,
 then you will need to basically abort one of the transactions. Okay. So, what you have to do is, you essentially, kill this transaction, and open up the deadlock. Okay. Hope that it opens up. Okay. So, you need to kill one of the transactions. You prefer to use the one that has the minimum work so far, but you have to be a little bit careful, because you end up with potentially, there's just too much contention, and a particular transaction keeps getting aborted. Okay. Whenever we, when a system aborts a transaction like this, we are not actually killing it, we are just restarting it. Okay. So, it doesn't go away, we just restart it. So, because of that, it's a possibility that it can, it can keep getting killed, because of deadlocks. Okay. A better approach is to, so, here's an example, where you can, example kind of questions that you would see, in the exam, where, where, essentially asking you to reason about, whether there's a deadlock here or not. In this case, I don't have the
 actual solution drawn out here, but we can see that, so, T2 is waiting on a bunch of them, is anyone waiting on T5, is waiting on T2, and, T2 is waiting on them, and then T1 is waiting on T5, so this is probably deadlock here. I don't, I don't remember if this example, has a deadlock, or it doesn't have a deadlock, but there's probably a deadlock. I see a cycle, here, T1, T5, T5 to T2, T2 to T6, and then T6 to T1. So, there's kind of a, a cycle in there. But the way you would do it, is to draw this out, as a, as a weights for graph, and then check whether there is a deadlock in there or not. Right, so something like this. Any questions on what, what, what we've been doing here so far? All good. Now, modern systems, try to prevent deadlocks. They don't actually go, create these weights for graph. That's just not an acceptable solution. It's fine in theory, maybe it worked, 30 years ago, but it doesn't work today. We're not, we're not going to look for deadlocks, and try to kill
 transactions based on that. There's a few different schemes, that can be used for preventing deadlocks. So, one scheme, is that, a transaction must acquire all locks, before it begins. Okay. And so, you can require, you, require a transaction, to, announce all the locks, it wants to take, and then, take them, before it starts any execution. Doesn't really solve any problem. Okay. First of all, it's not acceptable, because a transaction often doesn't know, what locks it wants. Secondly, the lock acquisition step, itself needs to work, because you can still have deadlocks, during the lock acquisition step. So, it doesn't really solve, any real problem. One approach that does work, is you require, a transaction, to acquire locks, in a particular order. So, what I mean is that, you, order all the items you have, in some fashion, doesn't really matter what fashion, and you can only go ahead, in your lock request. You can never go back. Okay. And, and so, as you go ahead, you can, so, let's
 say, items are numbered, 1 to 100, you take a lock on 1, then you can take a lock on 10, but after taking a lock on 10, you cannot ask, for a lock on 5. You cannot go back, in this order. So, you always move forward. What it does, effectively, as, as all of these schemes do, is that, they prevent edges happening. The way to think about, and we are going to talk about, two more techniques like this. The way to think about it is that, they prevent, a cycle from coming up. Okay. So, the, if you take locks in this order, on some order, and all transactions take locks in, the same order, you can never end up in a cycle. That's kind of what happens. Because, for a cycle to happen, in this, in this order based protocol, in a cycle to happen, you have to have a situation, where, T4 took a lock on something, and, T2 wants it. So, sort of, if you think about the, the order, and where each transaction is, T4 is, the most, ahead. Okay. And then, T2 is behind it, because, T2 wants a lock on
 something, that T4 has, which means that, T2 currently is behind, T4, and then, T3 wants a lock on something, that T2 has, which means, T3 is behind T2. So, there is no way for, T4 now to go behind, T3, because we are requiring them to, ask locks, in that specific order. Okay. So, there is no way for them to go back, and ask for a lock, that T3 currently has. And so, because of this, a cycle can never appear, and so, protocol like this, solution 2 here, is, is, is guaranteed, not to result, in a deadlock. But it's a really weird requirement, right? How are transactions, supposed to ensure, that they, never do this? But still, it's a solution, that you can consider. What we'll see here, is by the way, not one, best solution. These are, trade-offs, that a system designer, who is implementing, a modern system, implementing a data management system, has to make a decision, on this. There is no one answer to it. There is one answer to it, we would, you know, we would have figured that one
 out, most likely by now, but we don't have one answer to it. So, it's more of a, trade-offs. Okay. What do you, what do you, what is more important for you, as in your database system? A third solution, these solutions, the solution 3 and 4, have gruesome names, but they're, relatively straightforward. They use, timestamps. Okay. So, and there's two variations, of this scheme, that are very similar, to each other. So, I'll discuss one, and the second one, I won't discuss in detail. Every transaction, gets a timestamp, of when it entered. Okay. So, let's say, T1, entered the system, before T2. Now, in the first scheme, which is called, wait die, T1, is allowed, to wait for T2. So, older transaction, can wait for, a newer transaction. So, if a newer transaction, has a lock, the older transaction, wants it, we allow that. But, we do not allow, the newer transaction, to wait for the older transaction. Instead, the newer transaction, will be required, to, about, release all its locks, and
 restart. Okay. So, in a way, what this means is that, in the precedence graph, you can never have an edge, from a newer transaction, to an older transaction. Because, the newer transaction, will never wait, on an older transaction. And, as a result of it, you can never have a cycle, in the waits for graph, or, it's also called, precedence graph. You will never have, a cycle, in the precedence graph. Now, this scheme, is an example of a scheme, that's an eager, avoidance scheme. You are kind of, being proactive, in, killing transactions, hoping, hoping, or not hoping, but, to guarantee, that there are no deadlocks. Maybe there is no, real problem here. Right. So, remember what's going to happen, the new transaction comes in, wants a lock, an older transaction has it, this transaction, will, throw away all of its work, throw away the locks, or release the locks, and just restart. But, there is maybe, no reason for it. Okay. But, you know, that's why it's a, sort of a, a proactive
 scheme. It guarantees that, there will not be deadlocks, but you are potentially, losing a lot of work. Because, you are proactively, killing transactions, that may not need to be killed. Okay. But still, if our goal is, deadlock prevention, this scheme, will prevent deadlocks. Okay. And there is a slight, alternative to it, which is that, T1, still the older transaction, if T1 wants a lock, from T2, it will just take it. Okay. It will kill T2, and take the lock from T1, from T2. And so, we have a similar policy, as before, but here, you only have edges, from new transactions, to old transactions, but not the other way around. Either way, no edges, in the, in the precedence graph. Okay. And again, overall, these schemes, end up, being very proactively, killing many transactions, and neither. Okay. So, they, they waste resources. Okay. Any questions on this? And then, the last scheme, is a timeout based scheme, which is kind of, probably the easiest one, to implement. If a transaction,
 is waiting for a lock, after let's say, 50 milliseconds, it essentially, just kills itself, aborts and restarts. Okay. So, it's a very, again a proactive scheme, but it's very simple, to implement, and, no guarantees. These ones actually, guarantee, deadlock prevention, this one kind of, roughly guarantees it, but not always. But still, this is a very simple scheme, to implement, and does not require, any coordination, or complicated work. The assumption here, is that a timeout, like, assumption here, is that if you are, waiting for a long enough, time, there is a chance, you are in deadlock, and so, it just, kill itself, and restart. Okay. In all of these cases, when a transaction, is aborted, it releases its locks. That is really important. For a transaction, to restart, without about, releasing the locks, would not solve the problem. The problem is, because of the locks. So, the whole point, of killing a transaction, is to release the locks, and then retake it. Okay. Any questions
 so far? Give me just one second. Okay. There is something, is missing from these slides. In the meantime, you can think of questions. Okay. I'll add these slides in. I think, somewhere they got taken out. The final topic, in locking, that we are going to discuss, which actually is an interesting topic, although, a bit, conceptually, a bit deeper, than what we have been talking about, so far. It's a question of, what are we taking locks on? Okay. Are we taking locks on tables? Are we taking locks on tuples? Are we taking locks on attributes? Because ultimately, in most cases, we are updating attributes. Right. We are updating, let's say salary. Salary is a single attribute. So, the course granularity locks, refers to taking locks, on sort of big items, like tables. So, course granularity means, that you take a lock, on the entire table. MongoDB, for the longest time, only had course granularity locks. What it means is, it only took locks, on the entire collection. Okay. So, if you
 wanted to do an update, to a transaction, to a document, the lock, you are taking, was actually on the entire, set of documents, not a single document. I think they have gotten, to a point of, doing locks, on individual documents. Okay. The problem with taking locks, on tables, is that, you get, very little concurrency. Okay. Like, imagine again, the ticket master situation, where there is a tickets table. Like, if there is a lots of people, trying to take, buy tickets, taking a lock, on that entire tickets table, is basically, not acceptable. So, fine granularity, on the other hand, means that, you take locks, on tuples, but now, your overhead goes up, because now, you are trying, to take lots of locks. Okay. So, imagine the situation, where I want to, update like, 90% of the tuples, of a table, or, all 100%, like the example, we saw earlier, was, updating salaries, in all the instructor tuples. So, you would have to take a lock, on every single tuple, in there. Okay. What we really
 need, is we need the ability, for the database system, or for transactions, to take locks, on tables, when they want, like in this situation, or, on tuples, when they only want to take, a, a, a, a, a, small number of, a, tuples, like, when, only when, only when they want to, update small number of tuples. Okay. So, this, can be seen in the example, this can be, conceptualized, as a, a, hierarchy of, items, that you can take locks on. This is a slightly older, figure, it uses, a, slightly different terminology. So, R here stands for tuples, basically records. Okay. So, what you have is, you have a, kind of a, levels of, granularity here, starting with the database, at the top, so the whole database. Then you have, in this case, you have something called areas. Okay. So, ignore what they are, that is basically a division of, a, database, but, the actual division is not, important. Then you have F's. F's are actually relations. Okay. So, these are files, or relations. So, each file,
 corresponds to a relation, let's say. The exact granularity will depend on the, implementation of the database. So, but, think of F here as a table. And then R, are the tuples inside the table. Okay. So, what we want, is the ability to take locks, anywhere we want. Okay. for the transaction. There are situations, when the transaction actually wants to lock the whole database. At that point, what it means is that, no one else can be allowed to proceed. But, you know, so that, it should be used very sparingly. But, there are situations, if something needs to be fixed, let's say, that affects a bunch of things, you might need to essentially lock out everyone else, from the database. And so, I need that ability. But, for many transactions, which are updating individual values, like your, let's say, your registration records, the locks should be taken, at the lowest level. There is no reason for me to lock, even the relation, just to update, one student's registration. Okay. So, what I
 need, is, to allow, locks to happen at any, any, any point. Okay. Let's, the problem with that, is it's not that straightforward to implement. For instance, one transaction comes in, and says, you know what, I need to hold it up, so it goes ahead, and takes a lock here. Takes a lock here. X lock. And so, we record that, in our, in our lock table. Okay. Then the second transaction comes in, and says, I just want to update this. Okay. So, it goes ahead, and, tries to take a lock on this. Now, this should be disallowed, because, someone has locked the whole database, but I don't have a record of that here. Okay. Because here, there is no lock, on this record. There is a lock on the database, in my lock table, I have an entry, that saying that a transaction, has taken a lock on the database, but there is no record for RCM. Okay. So, the, the, the, previous one that I saw, doesn't really, the, the lock table mechanism I saw, is to have it in the slides here. Right. This doesn't really
 work. So, there is an entry for a database, the entire database, let's say, with a transaction, but there is no entry, for the specific tuple, that the second transaction is looking at. So, how do I solve this problem? Right. I want the ability for transactions, to take locks, anywhere in the hierarchy, but I need to be able to decide, that, given that x lock up there, a lock here cannot be allowed. Right. I need that ability also. Anyone with thoughts, on how we might solve this? So, in a sense, that's what you want, but if I, actually, propagate them down, by recording them in the lock table, that would defeat the purpose. Right. Because the whole point is, I want a single lock, if the lock is taken out of the database, I just want a single lock. But, if I were to propagate it, by adding in locks, on A1, A2, B, F, C, it will be too much. What if we have, like, this hierarchy, stored as a tree, or something, and then every time, like, a, a, a, a, a child is, like, called, or like,
 trap, a lock is tried to, you know, that child, they read the table and see, like, the parent, any of the parents have the lock on them. So, the mechanism here, which is similar to the actual mechanism we are going to discuss, is that, the transaction that wants a lock here, will not start here, it will actually start here. And it will go down, and, confirm that no ancestor, has a, conflicting lock. Okay. So, it will start here and check if DB has a lock that's problematic. It will, in this case, it will find that the DB has a lock that's problematic. And then it will stop, but, you know, in, if it does not, it will go down to A2, it will go down to FC. Keep checking if any of them have a lock that's problematic. Okay. And, so that's one part of the solution. But what about the flip solution? We have flip problem. Let's imagine that a transaction, imagine that a transaction has a X lock here. When it took the lock, no one else had a lock. Now, another transaction comes and wants to
 take an X lock here. Now what? How do I find that? The solution of going through the ancestors is a simple one, because the number of ancestors for RCM is small. But for this transaction, which wants a lock on DB, for it to check for all of these, that's not acceptable. That's too much work. Anyone? So, the solution here is, so to solve this problem and also solve other problems here, is that, for the transaction that wants to take a lock here, it starts at the top. Now, this transaction doesn't actually want a lock on database, but, it wants a lock down. So, it's going to record an entry for that. And, it's going to record an entry with a new lock called IX. Intention, so, I here stands for intention. So, it's going to take an IX lock. It's going to take an IX lock here. It's going to take an IX lock here. And, then, it's going to take an X lock here. So, this transaction, which only wants to obtain RCM, is still going to take locks on the ancestors, but, there's going to be a
 different locks. These are called intention exclusive locks, IX. Effectively, what an IX lock means, so, if I come here, and if I look at, look at database, and I see an IX lock by a transaction, what it means is that, that transaction has an exclusive lock, somewhere further down. It doesn't tell me where the transaction has a lock. It just tells me that, that transaction, has an IX lock here, which means that, it has an exclusive lock somewhere below. At this point, I can use this to decide, that the other transaction, which wants a lock on database, has to be, has to wait. Okay. Because, this is an intention exclusive lock, which means that, somewhere down below, there is an X lock, I cannot allow an X lock here. So, that's the idea behind the intention locks, and, and that's kind of quick, right? The rest of it is a bit of a development. We have three types of intention locks, IS, for intention shared, IX, intention exclusive, and, a special lock mode, called, SIX, which is both
 shared, and intention exclusive, simultaneously. So, six lock basically means, that the, entire, tree, is locked in the shared mode, and parts of it, are potentially locked in exclusive mode. So, this is common, for instance, if I want to, look at, all the instructors, and only update, salaries for a few of them, based on a condition. In that case, I will, lock the entire relation, in S mode, read all of the relation, and only update a few of them, by, utilize, by getting the X locks, on those specific tuples. And now, the protocol is that, if you want to acquire a lock, and a data item, your ancestors must have locks, in the intentional mode. And we always start at the root mode. Okay. So, here is an example. If a transaction, wants to lock, F A, here, in shared mode, then first, we have to take an, IS lock here, and IS lock here, then you can, ask for an, S lock here. Okay. If you want to, lock RC1, in exclusive mode, all of these, have to be locked, in detention exclusive mode.
 Okay. So that, that is the, that is the protocol, that we require. Okay. We get a new compatibility matrix, on whether the locks are compatible. A couple of the entries in here, require a little bit of thought, but they are not, super complicated. So, if two different transactions, want IS locks, on a, on a, entry, on let's say, on the database, we can allow that. That's not really a problem. But even if, one transaction, wants an IS lock, and another, wants an IS lock, IS lock, that's also allowed. Okay. Because, so, imagine that, a transaction has an, IS lock here, and, ancestor, so I won't show it, and it has a, S lock here. If another transaction, wants an, IS lock, we can allow that. If, if there is an actual conflict, that the second transaction, also wants an, X lock here, that conflict will be, detected at here. We don't really have a conflict here. And what, by that, what we allow is that, one transaction has a, IS lock here, S lock here, another one has a, IS lock here, and
 an, X lock here. We allow that. That's not conflicting in any way. Okay. So, the compatibility matrix, kind of looks like this. If, let's say a table has an, IS lock, another table wants, another transaction wants, IS lock, allowed, IS lock, allowed, S allowed, X can never be allowed, to coexist with anything, so you will see only, uh, uh, crosses in these, two columns and rows, but, rest of them, have a fair amount of shared identity. Okay. So, even two, IS locks are compatible, but, IS and, six or IX and shared, are not compatible. Those are not allowed at the same time. By definition, if a table is, if a table is shared, I cannot allow someone to update a record inside it. Okay. Uh, so, because of that, S and IX are not compatible. Okay. Um, more examples. Um, so, this is an example of how this might look like, the example that I just showed. T1 has a, IS lock, and S lock on T2. T2 has an IX lock here, and X lock here. Perfectly fine. We have no problem with that. Okay. Um, a few
 more examples here, that just show, uh, what's, uh, allowed and not allowed. Um, trying to remember, exactly what this is trying to show here. So, T1 there, has, uh, uh, IX locks on R, here, and X lock on, uh, F2.1. Okay. Uh, now each of the situations, the question is, can T2 get access, to F2.2. So, F is field here, so think of it as an attribute of 2.2. So, can T2 access this, okay, in X mode? Okay. So, in this case, in order for T2 to access, uh, to get a lock on this one, it has to, first, get an IX lock here, which is allowed. IX lock here, allowed, because they're compatible. And then, it has to get an X lock here, again allowed. Okay. So, in the first case, T2 will be allowed, to take the locks it wants. In the second case, it will block though. So, because, uh, T1 has blocked, uh, entire T2 in shared mode. So, when T1, uh, sorry, when T2 wants an IX lock here, that will get blocked. So, T2 will end up waiting on T2. I guess I should, probably use different, uh, letters here.
 And in the third case, uh, third case, oh, T1 has a six lock. So, we have a problem here. We will get blocked right here. Okay. Because six, S means that T1 has a shared lock on the whole thing. I cannot let T2 in here at all. Okay. Because T2 wants to update, so I cannot let T2 in. So, this kind of just shows the, uh, some of the examples, uh, um, of how this looks like. Um, more examples, um, of what kind of locks to get. So, for instance, if T1 wants to scan an entire relation and only update a few items, few tuples, T1 can get a six lock on R, and then get an X lock on specific tuples. Okay. And so, yeah. It repeats what we, uh, discussed. So, let me recap and we'll stop here. Uh, locking based concurrency control is still, uh, quite widely used. Uh, although it is not the first, uh, choice in a modern system today, uh, for a variety of reasons, which we won't really get into details on. Um, because they require more discussion than we have time for. Uh, the key idea with locking
 based concurrency control is that take locks as required. Uh, we talked about two phase locking, the couple of variations, strict two phase locking is what we really want. Uh, we talked about deadlocks and multigallularity locking. Okay. Uh, and as it says here, uh, many commercial databases support locking based concurrency control, but, uh, snacks, something called multiversion concurrency control is, is more common today. Okay. And we'll talk about that in the, in the next class. Okay. Any quick questions before we stop? All right. So I'll update the slides and repost them and we'll continue from this point on in the next, next class. Hello.
