 Okay, so for the last couple of weeks we have been talking about transactions which again are kind of a really important part of a database system. Databases, just to do a little bit of review before we jump back into recovery, databases have historically supported what are called the acid properties which were originally defined in a research paper in 1976 and were implemented as part of IBM DB2 back then. And they have kind of formed the basis of pretty much everything that has been done since then. And so they continue to be called acid properties even though there is limitations of it like they don't really handle distributed as well and so on, we still call them acid properties. Fundamentally we need to guarantee that when the users does a transaction, specific transaction, whether all the transaction happens or none of it happens, we need to guarantee that even if there are concurrent transactions, they don't sort of cause problems for each other. And then we need to guarantee that anything that is considered finished, committed, finished, done, any transaction that's committed, its changes are not lost, whatever changes it did are not lost. So we talked about isolation a fair bit last week or the week before where we talked about different ways to guarantee isolation, to guarantee that concurrent transactions appear as if they are running one after the other. And we talked about serializability, we talked about locking and multiversion concurrency control schemes. Last class we started talking about the A and D because those two are usually handled as a unit, atomicity and durability. And there is really only one practical way of doing this, which is through logging. So you keep track of everything that happens in the database at a single update level and use that to guarantee both of those. So that's where we are going to pick up. But any questions so far? And once again, just to give you the example motivations here, these are some of the examples of transactions you can think of when we are talking about atomicity or durability. This one focuses on atomicity but also works for durability. Like a transaction that changes the prerequisite. If only one instruction happens, we kind of have a problem. We need both of them to happen. A transaction that wants to set the salary increase for all the instructors. Again, lots of people is being updated. No way to do it atomically at the hardware level. This has to be implemented in the software. Removing a section and all of that. So jumping ahead. So let me review this slide one more time because this sets the basis for how the protocols work. And a lot of what we do is going to be about memory and disk interface. So once again, this is the disk on this side. We have two pages here. We have two pages here, A and B, blocks or pages. On disk, we usually use the word block. In memory, we use the word page. But they are basically synonymous. That's the memory buffer tool. That's the one that's shared by the transactions or queries and everything and is managed by the buffer manager. And then we have the work area for each transaction where only the things that they are actually interested in are sort of copied over. So the way to think of this is that disk page A may contain many tuples. The whole page gets copied into the buffer pool because that's the only way to get data from disk to the buffer pool. I can't get one tuple from a page directly into the memory. I have to get the whole block. Block is the unit of transfer between disk and memory. So even if I just want one byte of B, I need to copy the whole B into memory. So that gets copied here. We use the input and output instructions to specify that in our sort of list of instructions. But when transaction 1 only wants x1, which is let's say one tuple, it only copies that tuple over from here to here. So this is not a page copy. This is a tuple copy or an object copy. So this is not a t1. So this is not a t1. So this page here. So this page here. This page here, x, containing x is identical to this page until it's changed of course, but otherwise it's a copy of this page. But this x1 here is a tuple or an object inside that page. And only that is gotten copied into the work area of t1. t1 is the first transaction that's operating on it. t2 is the second transaction that also has a copy of x from here. So it copied this over from here to here. And operated upon it. At some point, transaction 1 is ready to write this back. Let's say both of them were updated. When it's ready to write them back, it will basically copy them back into these pages. And now these pages eventually will be copied into the disk. So that's kind of the flow of data or the data movement that we need to keep in mind. Questions? Questions so far? Is this okay? And the thing that you have to do in this whole recovery atomicity literature when you are trying to develop techniques is you have to imagine that a disk crash happens at any time. For instance, our system crash. We assume that our disks do not crash. So our disks are uncorrupted and sort of permanent. That is a separate assumption that's handled through different mechanisms. So disk for us does not crash. So disk for us does not crash. But the system can crash. So for instance, the system can crash. So this transaction wants to copy the new values of x1 and y1 here. That's two separate copies. And between those two copies, the system could crash. So x1 got copied here. Before the y1 could get copied here, the system crashed. So we need to make sure we can handle that situation. Let's say both of them are updated by t1 and t1 is committed. The buffer manager could take this page and write it to disk. But this page stays in memory. So which means that of the two updates that t1 did, one update is on disk, one update is not in disk. And the system crashes. So we kind of need to handle all of these situations in this sort of literature. And that's why you often also end up with bugs in your system. It's not uncommon for people to find problems with their system because it's somewhat intricate, especially if I have many threads going on in parallel and these things are happening. It can kind of be difficult to reason about every possibility. And so you end up with potentially bugs. So we have to, you know, obviously we are not going into so much depth here that we will run into those in our discussion, but they can happen when you are implementing these systems. Any questions on this? So next we will start talking about how logs are used and what requirements we have and how you, you know, how you write them and how you use them. So discussion of that stuff. So our basic sort of technique for doing this is going to be to write out logs. And as I mentioned last time, these are not the logs we usually write. We write old and new values. But just because this was the example picked from the book, there are two transactions. And these are all the updates that the transactions are doing. So what we are writing here is a log record that says P0 started. A log record is timestamped. So every log record has a timestamp associated with it. So they are generated in sequence. In fact, log records have sequence numbers associated with them. They are called LSNs. L-S-N. Log sequence number. So let's say this one has a log sequence number of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and so on. So that's an order. And that order is important as we will discuss several times today. So the first log record we generate here is the T0 start. We have to record the fact that a transaction started. Then we record the fact that T0 updated A to 950. Then we record the fact that T0 updated B to 2050. Then we record the log that T0 committed. T1 started. T1 updated C to 60. And T1 committed. So these are kind of kinds of log record we will generate. Not exactly the same but something like this. And we are going to use this log records to take care of the atomicity requirements. Now we start with discussing the potential challenges with this. For instance, let me see if I can do this better as an example on board instead. Find the pen. So let's leave that one. Because it's easier for me to see here. So the first thing that we have to realize is that let's say we had a transaction. Okay. Transaction T1. And T1 says A equal to A plus 50. Okay. And corresponding to that, let's say the old value of A was 100. So we generate a log record that says T1 updated A from 100 to 150. I always prefer writing with an arrow because that makes it very clear that what is the old value, what's the new value. Otherwise I always get confused. When people just write two numbers, I'm like which one is supposed to be the old value. Because there doesn't seem to be agreed upon whether it's old value, new value, or new value, old value. Now here's the first thing that you need to realize is that the first thing is that this log record, if it is generated after the update, after the actual update, then I potentially have a problem. Because it might happen that the system crashes right here. Now we potentially have a problem. The value of A may actually have been updated, but there is no log record that was written out. So I don't know whether A was updated. Ultimately, because this transaction is not currently finished, I would want to essentially go back to the value of 100. Because the transaction never finished. So the correct value of A after I recover from the crash should be 100. So the log record is not currently finished. But if I don't have this log record, I have no way to know that someone updated A. So my first requirement is going to be that the log record must be generated, like actually in time generated before I actually make the update. So the update cannot be done until the log record is generated. It's perfectly fine for me to be a log record and the value not be updated. That is fine. But it is problematic if the value is updated and the log record is not written out. Make sense? And this is a principle that we often call it right ahead logging. It's actually, it's not fully clear whether this term applies to this particular issue, but it sort of does. So right ahead logging or WAL for short, basically says that the log record should be written out before the action that you take. Okay. So always do the log record first before you do the action. Okay. Make sense? Any questions on why we did this? This type of reasoning, what if there is a crash here, what if there is a crash here, is something that we're going to see a lot of today and also in the next class. Okay. Now here's the second assumption that we are making. We are going to relax this assumption afterwards because this is too restrictive. Okay. But the first assumption, the, oops, where is it? So the first assumption here is that the log record, as soon as it's generated, we write it to disk. It's kind of important for us to write log records to disk. They are useless if they are in memory because memory is, you know, we can lose memory at any time. So it is really important for us that log records are actually written out to disk. Now we're not going to require them to be written out immediately. We need, we'll relax it because this is too restrictive. But still, our hope is that the log records are written out to disk as soon as possible. Okay. A second really important thing is that the log records are written in the order they are generated. Okay. For instance, if you end up with a situation like this, you know, we have T1, T1 does A equal to A minus 50, B equal to B plus 50. And then the log record for this is T1 A 100 to 150. And log record for this is T, actually forget this one, T1 end. Okay. And so the log record for T1 end is T1 end. So our problem potentially is that if the T1 end is on disk but this is not on disk, that's also problematic for us. Okay. Because now we have an end log record on disk, but we actually don't have an update that the transaction made. That's problematic because, you know, disk is our only permanent sort of guarantee here. Right. So what this means is that when I recover, I look at the log record. I see a log record for T1 end. I don't see any log record for an update. So I assume that the transaction didn't make any updates. Okay. Which is going to be problematic. I have to be able to, like in the recovery process, I have to be able to reason about what updates were made by the transaction. And seeing an end without the update records on log is problematic. Okay. So I have to have a, a log record must be written out in sequence. Okay. This is less problematic in some ways because log records have LSNs. So this has a LSN 100. This has a LSN 102. So when I recover and I see 102 and I don't see 100, I know there is a problem. But it's a problem that will require, it won't be easy to solve it. Okay. Because that log record is lost now. This log record was written on disk. This log record was in memory when the system crashed. So I have lost it. So now I know T1 ended. But I have no idea what T1 did. And even though I know that there is a problem because I am missing this log record 100, there is no easy way for me to fix it. Because that log record is literally gone. Okay. And so, so I cannot never have this happen. That log records must be written to disk in the order they were generated. So these three are kind of, these two are kind of non-negotiable for us. This one we will relax a little bit. Okay. We also assume strict two-phase locking. I will explain why that later it's required for recovery to actually work. Okay. So the first assumption can be relaxed and we will relax it. As a special case, we consider a transaction to be committed only if T1 commit is on disk. So now imagine another situation where you are doing a bank transfer. Oops. Wrong one. When we are doing a bank transfer. So I'm doing a bank transfer, right? So T1 does start A equal to A minus 50, B equal to B plus 50. Commit. Print. Reset. Okay. Now, this is the sequence of log record. These are the sequence of operations I have. And I have log records, right? So I have a log record for T1 that says A went from 100 to 50. T1, B went from 200 to 250. T1 commit. Okay. So I generated these log records. But the question here is about when are these written out to disk? Okay. Because remember, disk is our only permanent guarantee here. So unless this is written out to disk, we cannot consider the transaction to be committed. Okay. Because if we don't, if we, for instance, if we print the receipt at 10.01 AM and this particular record is written out, let's say at 10.02 AM, there is a gap between these two. 10.01 AM and 10.02 AM. The system could crash in the middle of this. Now, user has a receipt that says the transaction was done, but I have no commit on disk. Okay. That's problematic. Because now the user believes that the transaction happened, it's committed, but I don't have a corresponding T1 commit on disk. So this is again problematic. So the requirement I have is that I do not consider T1 committed until this record is actually on disk for sure. So in fact, I'm going to wait until this record gets to disk before I print out the receipt. Okay. Because that two actions, the printing out the receipt and T1 commit must happen in that order. T1 commit first, print out receipt second. If they are flipped, I potentially have a problem. Okay. So that's this requirement. That as a special case, T1 is considered, a transaction is considered committed only after the commit record is on disk. Okay. Now you might ask, weren't we trying to avoid writing things to disk? And the answer is yes. We were trying to avoid writing things to disk. But we have two benefits with log records. Log records are sequential. I'm not doing random IOs. When I'm writing logs, I'm writing them one after the other. And a whole bunch of them are going out at the same time because they're all written out to the same page. And since my IO is in units of pages, with a transaction that updates 10 values, I'm updating 10 separate pages. Whereas the log records are all on the same page or consecutive pages. And also in high performance systems, the log records are typically stored on a separate disk. Okay. In fact, multiple disks. If I really want to be sure that I can handle disk failures. Okay. So because of these two reasons, we consider log writes to be very efficient. But actual writes to the data, they are going to be slower. Any questions? There exists file systems, in particular, a research prototype called LFS. Actually, it's from a long time ago. But I believe the ideas exist in newer file systems that are entirely log structured. The whole file system is basically a log. And that's not, it's a very interesting as a thought experiment on how systems like this could be done. LFS itself wasn't practical, but variations of it show up in different file systems. Yes. Could you just like in front of why you know the answer is that you need to register so the problem is that like when I'm some of it becomes clear when we discuss how we use the log but essentially if the log records are not in sequence the recovery algorithm just don't work basically because if there are missing log records then the recovery algorithm when it comes back when the system comes back up and when it wants to do something it doesn't know what's like there are things missing it knows there are things missing because of the log sequence number but it has no idea what to do about it and also committing it's really problematic if the commit record is on disk or one of the update records is not on disk so a situation like this and again this will become more clear when we discuss how we use it but since we had this example just up here if you look at an update like this you know P1 A B updated A and B and then committed out if the commit record is on disk but these two records are not on disk we know the transaction committed but we don't know what it did and remember there is a possibility that the actual values have not been updated on disk so in other words I have no idea what the transaction did so that's why they have to be they have to go out in order and there is not a particularly hard guarantee in ways it will actually be difficult for log records not to be written on the sequence the way they are generated and they are just written out to a file they can append it to a file right think of the log file as literally a file that you are just appending log records to it's kind of going to be the common situation that they go out in order okay so how do I actually use these log records there are two purposes of the log one purpose of the log is going to be one purpose of the log is going to be to abort a transaction remember a transaction may get aborted for many different reasons it might itself decide there is user logic in the transaction that says you know I'm done I don't want to continue the user might sort of go through some steps and then decide to cancel for deadlocks we might kill a transaction several different reasons why a transaction might get aborted if it does we need to be able to go back we need to be able to change the values back to the original values so here is an example even started updated a from 200 to 300 b from 400 to 300 updated a back from 300 to 200 so let's not worry about why it did that but it decided to do it and now t1 decided to award so what we are going to do is we are going to go backwards and simply replace the old values so in this case we will go backwards like this replace 200 with 300 replace 300 for b change it back to 400 change a back to 200 we are not going to shortcut this it's a lot easier just to go backwards and do all the changes then try to figure out that it's the change to the same value we are just going to go back and that's pretty much it so using the log to do undo is just this we just do this going backwards is important we are because again a was updated twice so we have to go backwards we try to go forward so it will be a problem we restore a to 300 restore b to 400 restore a to 200 as us we are actually not even these are updates so restoring a back to 300 b to 400 these are also updates so we are going to record them as well and these will be special log records called compensation log records and they will be written out exactly like the log records so at this point there will be three more log records written out four more log records written out we will write out t1 a 300 t1 b 400 t1 a 200 and then finally we will write out t1 about okay so and that will be the end of the transaction t1 for us t1 will finish at that point because that will be the last action we do so after this step there will be four log records written out including the compensation log records now remember I mentioned that we have to assume strict two phase locking and again reminder that strict two phase locking basically means that we do not release the locks until the transaction is finished well this is why we don't do it because in order for me to replace these back to their original values I need to have locks on eb which I already took so I cannot release them if I release them someone might come in and update a and b and that will be like all kinds of problems okay so I'm just going to keep locks until the end of the transaction until the t1 commit or t1 abort log records have been written out on disk so no other transaction should have changed a and b that's why we need strict two phase locking questions so that's the undo part of it why do we need undo undo is the one that gives us atomicity okay atomicity is about the entire transaction happening undo is the one that's going to give us that atomicity the ability to give go back in the log records and simply undo all the changes that the transaction did okay the next step for us is what happens if there's a system crash okay so so if there is a system crash okay we basically assume that the entire contents of the memory are lost okay so hold on yeah now we don't require force which means that we may have updates by a transaction that are not on disk so we need to make sure that we redo them okay so the recovery part of it which is what happens after the system crashes we simply go through the log forward and we redo all the changes okay so in this case for instance imagine that I had a log record like this with a T1 commit at the end and the system crashed I start at the top and I simply reapply all these changes note that because I have the old value and the new value I can simply go ahead and essentially copy over the new values and I'm done I'm not even going to check whether the A was already updated on disk I just don't care I'm just going to apply all the changes okay the easiest way for me to handle is just apply all the changes and that kind of it okay I mean there are some details here we're going to talk about but I want to make sure we are okay on this because in some ways the log is a record of every single change that was made to the database I'm simply going to make all of those changes from the very beginning okay for now let's assume we start at the very beginning okay we'll figure out how to make it more efficient but for now we start at the very beginning and just do every single change that was done okay make sense now here's a question what happens to the transactions that were actually in progress when the system crashed okay what do I do about them it's a relatively simple answer because when I did the when I just mentioned how I do recovery I start at the beginning and I just go through all the log records I didn't make a distinction between transactions that committed and the transactions that did not commit okay I'm going to redo the changes of all the transactions so what should I do with the transactions that did not commit anyone so an example here I think I have a longer example later but let me so for instance I have a log record logs that says T1 start T1 a 100 to 150 T2 start T1 B from 150 to 100 T2 C from 100 to 200 T2 let's say T2 committed and crash something like this so in this very simple example and when the system comes back up it starts at the beginning of the log and start doing all these changes and then it comes to this point okay so T2 is committed T1 is currently not finished there is no T1 commit which means that T1 was still in progress at that time okay so in other words at this point I have to go back and undo the changes okay so what I'm going to do is I will keep track of all the transactions that I started but did not finish when this happened when I came back to this point and that transaction in this case is T1 then I go back and undo the changes of T1 okay you might say that's wasted work sure but this is what I'm going to do okay it keeps my logic simple okay my logic is redo everything undo what I need to undo okay and you can optimize it you know you can keep more information around to kind of avoid doing the changes that T2 T1 did to begin with because these changes are sort of unnecessary but I'm not going to try to do that it's easier for me to just go backwards after at the end of it okay any questions this makes sense okay we because we are not keeping track of whether the change was already done it's important for us that our log records are what are called idempotent is that if I reapply the log record it doesn't cause a problem our log records are idempotent but imagine a log record like this imagine a log record like this log record like this log record like this T1 A incremental by 100 the problem with this one is that now we need to keep track of whether this log record was applied to the data item or not okay because if I don't know that I can't I can't keep applying this like in my previous example like for these log records for these log records applying them means that I set A to 300 if A was already 300 fine if A was 200 I'll set it to 300 it doesn't change anything but if it's a if it's a increment by 100 or increment by 100 or something like that then I need to know whether I'm dealing with the old value or the new value because if it's a new value I cannot reapply this log record so these types of log records have to be used very carefully you can use them database systems do use them but you have to be a bit careful in using them okay so what we use are what's called value-based logging or sometimes called physical logging that's what we use and that's the easiest to deal with operation based logging can be more efficient but it requires more care okay so more fancy systems like more complex and sophisticated systems use systems techniques can use logical logging so to summarize a little bit because this is kind of the heart of it there's there's some small details we'll talk about the log based recovery to kind of summarize is that we keep the log as we talked about value-based log if during normal processing a transaction needs to abort we use undo if the system crashes we first do a full redo followed by undo okay and that's our overall algorithm to get into a little bit of detail on the recovery algorithm we first do a full redo phase or redo phase where we redo all the updates of a transaction followed by undo of the incomplete transaction there is some more detail in the slides on how exactly this is done in the redo phase we start with a empty list of transactions any time we see a log record we go ahead and apply it note that applying it basically means you have to bring the x in this case xj you have to bring it into memory and update it so this is a real update okay whenever we see a new start record we add it to the list whenever we see a commit record we remove it from the list and what this does is that at the end of the recovery when we have to update it the undo list the undo list the undo list contains all the log records that all the transactions that are that need to be undone and in the undo phase we go backwards and in effect we basically undo all the transactions okay and that's pretty much it okay this just explains the same thing we talked about in more detail that you can look at later okay so here is an example a full example from the book the log starts here we have t0 start b got updated 2050 ignore the checkpoints for now t1 started actually i think this might be difficult to do without without the checkpoints so let's let's let's let's stop here for a second any any any we'll go through that example once we have covered checkpointing any questions so far again recovery uh... again recovery uh... the way we look at it is really simple because we uh... simply redo everything followed by undo all the in progress transactions right that makes it really simple uh... there are more complex uh... versions of uh... recovery that try to optimize but but this is the easiest okay and this is what's commonly used in in practice as well now here's a question um... um... the database system may have started multiple days ago right maybe months ago before it crashed i don't want to start at the beginning when i do restart recovery okay so how do i make that faster okay how do i not start all the way at the back okay because the first up first log record might be days or months old i don't want to start from that that that that that will the recovery itself will take me like hours at that that that that's okay yeah thoughts on how you might do that um anyway so the the technique which is again very general technique uh of course applying it here requires the uh special logic is is what's called uh checkpointing okay uh so checkpointing is uh uh uh so checkpointing is uh mechanism by which we uh uh sort of write out so again the the problem we are trying to solve is that we don't know how far we should go back into the log because we don't know when updates were made okay uh so the way the checkpointing works is periodically the database system will write out everything in memory to disk okay it doesn't matter whether it doesn't matter whether it doesn't matter whether it was a committed transaction or an uncommitted transaction uh whether it's a dirty uh update or not we write out everything to disk okay uh and that's it okay so the steps in the checkpointing are uh now the in the simplest version of it we are going to stop the database system entirely while we are checkpointing in the actual implementations we can get around this um uh we stop all other activity write out the entire contents of the memory to disk and again by entire we mean all updates okay we are not only talking about updates made by committed transactions but all updates and then uh we write out make sure all the log records are written up after that we write a special log record called a checkpoint log record and in this checkpoint log record we are going to list out all the transactions that are currently active okay uh and then we restart our thing okay now the way this helps and again there's an example of this was uh shown here okay so there's a lot of lot going on here so let's look at the log records first we know t0 started uh we know t0 started uh t0 updated uh b to 2050 then t1 started so at this point we took a checkpoint which means that whatever updates were made all the updates are on disk so now the value of b on disk should be 2050 okay because b was updated uh uh by t1 t0 and so the uh as part of checkpointing this value will be returned out to disk and then we have a checkpoint record checkpoint record uh lists out the active transactions t0 and t1 okay and then t1 continued t1 committed t2 started uh t2 made some changes t1 decided it uh didn't want to continue uh same with t2 and so on okay so this checkpoint record is uh contains a list of active transactions and then we are going backwards it kind of helps us stop at this point we don't need to go too far back beyond the checkpoint okay does the checkpoint log record make sense any questions on the checkpointing uh steps itself okay okay now the question is how do we use the checkpoint well what we're going to do well let's say the system crashed here okay the system crashed here and we come back up we're not going to start at the beginning we're going to start at the latest checkpoint okay now that checkpoint says um uh t0 and t1 were active so we can't start here or actually we can start here it's not a problem we start here here and we redo all the changes from this point on we don't need to redo this change because this change was written out during the checkpoint so we don't have to redo it any changes that were made before the checkpoint i don't need to worry about okay i only worry about the changes that were made after the checkpoint so in my redo phase i'm going to start at the checkpoint and simply go forward okay and if if there and again in the undo phase i'll go backwards from these transactions and go backwards so the checkpointing in effect helps me uh stop my uh redo or helps me start my redo at this point rather than at the very beginning of the log which could be days or weeks or months before okay okay on the on like a single server databases they don't crash that often you know the crashes are more common in large uh uh deployments but many smaller deployments you're not going to see crashes very often so the checkpoint uh uh will be uh really help us reduce the amount of work we have to do okay okay any questions not hard for me to tell how much you are all following this uh or you're planning to rely on the slides um but let's see if any of you can answer the question of why do i care about this list of active transactions what what is the purpose of that okay so as i mentioned if i have a checkpoint when i do a restart recovery i just start at this point so why do i even care about this why do i care about the list of active transactions here right but why do i need to do that so generally true but there is a more specific uh the answer could be more specific there's a more specific reason why i need that list of check because when i'm redoing i'm just starting here and just redoing everything the things here i don't need to redo because they have already done in some ways okay so i have no reason to redo that because i have written out everything to disk so these all the changes to this points are already on disk so i don't need to worry about them i redo all of these changes in order and i do the sort of go backwards and do these about that as needed so why do i care about the checkpoint or the the list of transactions in the checkpoint there's a more specific reason it is true that we have to go back but why so imagine a transaction like t uh 0 which started you know in this case p0 did did commit so you know let's assume that the crash happened here okay let's imagine that the crash happened here no not here here the crash happened here so this is the point at which the crash happened so let me here is our link let's imagine that the crash happened somewhere oops what happened my pen crash happened here uh crash happened here okay so the crash happened here i come back up the recovery system looks at checkpoint goes forward does the changes at this point it knows that t2 was started but did not finish so it undoes t2 but the thing is t0 also started and did not finish so it should actually undo t0 as well but it doesn't know that it doesn't even is there okay without this uh list of active transaction it doesn't even know to look for t0 because t0 started before in the redo phase i only start at this point so i never encountered t0 anywhere so i don't even know that t0 had started okay so that's why i need the list of active transactions because at this point after i have done t2 i also need to go back and undo t0 and that's why i need the list of active transactions okay without that i wouldn't know that t0 had even started because here i don't have any log record for t0 the update for t0 was before and t0 hasn't committed yet so t0 was still active when the system crashed so i have to be able to go backwards and undo this change and write out the corresponding t0 about record any question and this is a relatively simple fix in the in the redo phase so this is again the same algorithm we talked about before with some modifications in the redo phase we find the last checkpoint and our undo list we started with this l list of active transactions that's our starting undo list so if there is a transaction that started before the checkpoint record and never finished it will be part of that l okay and that's it otherwise i don't do anything else so recovery uh sort of with checkpointing most of the undo redo remains the same but then we have checkpoints to reduce the restart recovery time okay okay any questions all right um right ahead logging uh we assumed earlier that uh log records are written to disk as soon as they are generated uh which is of course not true because that would be too restrictive uh for the right ahead logging the principle is that if we had an update to a data item and a log record now we already discussed that the log record should be generated before the update but we need a stricter guarantee we need that the log record makes it to disk before the update does because we don't want to be in a situation where the update is on disk but the log record is not on disk okay so this is called a right ahead logging and this is a very general principle that is used by all systems today to guarantee that your log is a correct reflection of your system so it's perfectly fine if the log record for the update is on disk and the update is not on disk it's perfectly not fine uh it's very problematic if the log record is on there if the update is on disk and the log record is not on disk we don't want that to happen okay so the way this is guaranteed is through use of the lsn's um basically what you do and i don't have slides on this but um effectively every page so this is a memory page memory page has an lsn on it uh i think it has a name page lsn i believe okay so when you update something on this page the page lsn is updated to uh refer to the latest log record so the log records are written out somewhere else right so these are the log records so you have a log record 1 200 200 if this log record is about a goes from 5 to 10 and if a is here when i set a equal to 10 this page lsn is updated to 200 okay so this is the log record number 200 that says a was updated from 5 to 10 this is the a equal to 10 update so while making this update i set the page lsn to 200 okay now when the buffer manager wants to write this page to disk it confirms that all the records up to 200 are on disk and if the records up to 200 are not on disk it waits until these records go to disk these log records go to disk before it writes this page to memory now to disk okay this is very important because otherwise we can if these two get flipped if this gets returned to disk after this we kind of have a problem okay this is by the way not easy to guarantee in on your laptop for instance your postgreSQL on your laptop can't guarantee this okay if you if you dig into the postgreSQL documentation you will see a discussion that um because postgreSQL does not have the support to guarantee something like this uh its recovery guarantees are actually not accurate so that's what this says um um right ahead logging is sufficient for our purposes that's kind of what we need as a guarantee and again a special case is that a transaction is not considered committed unless decommit is on disk any questions so far um this is like the most basic algorithm okay the actual algorithms are implemented in practice are way more complicated um for instance one simple problem is that uh we are assuming that the system holds during checkpointing that's obviously not acceptable yeah um so um you need to allow the system to continue executing transactions while checkpointing is going on um and that's you know that's that's complicated you have to essentially keep track of a uh a bunch of uh a bunch of more information to make that happen but it's required right the system stopping during checkpointing is basically not acceptable okay uh the system might crash while we're recovering uh this actually funny enough our our protocol is actually okay with this okay um our protocol is uh um sort of just doesn't care but in the when i have you know when i have taking care of this issue and more uh complicated schemes uh you cannot need to worry about this problem okay um we talked about b plus three indexes a lot which are still very widely used uh especially in the older systems uh we can't do uh strict two-phase locking for that okay we didn't we don't cover this even we covered this in advanced classes uh graduate classes but um at a high level the strict two-phase locking cannot be uh used for b plus trees because that's too restrictive okay remember two-phase locking requires that if you update a pay update a value or update a page you have to keep a lock on it until the transaction finishes a b plus tree update you know when we talked about b plus tree uh uh sort of changes to the b plus tree indexes during inserts and deletes we are updating the b plus tree pages so the strict two-phase locking requires us to take locks on b plus tree which is not acceptable it's too performance wise it's too slow and so really interesting schemes to um uh do indexing on b plus trees there's like a quite a few papers written on that topic because um b plus trees is a uh contain there can be a lot of pertain to b plus tree so we need to be more careful with them um so you can't you can't use physical locking for them like you have to use logical logging and that has a bunch of additional issues that come up okay some of these are covered in the 624 uh the graduate databases class so if you're interested in learning more about this you can uh try to take that class i think the next time that's going to be offered it's actually being offered right now so the next time it will be offered will most likely be spring 24 20 sorry spring uh 27 okay um we are teaching 724 next semester but that one doesn't cover these topics that's focused on queries so 724 currently largely handles query processing stuff not transaction stuff uh if you really want to dig further into it uh and also the book has a description description description of it but there is a system called aries or a paper called aries whatever you want to call it um that's considered a canonical description of log-based recovery it has everything that you might want and not want a lot of detail in it it used to be a required reading for our graduate databases class um uh even when i took it as graduate database class 25 years ago and even today um the ideas from aries uh kind of what's used in pretty much all the systems it talks about the checkpointing the fuzzy checkpointing where you let the transactions go on uh many other types of log records nested transactions we didn't really talk about issues like this but transactions can be nested like one transaction can have other transactions in it so you need special techniques for them and then to do that uh so you need to be able to capture the transaction um so other types of log records that both simplify and complicate recovery um we didn't talk about what happens when uh uh disk themselves are lost right um so typically um if a disk is uh uh lost we kind of need to like to handle disk loss or disk itself crashing we kind of need to make copies of the data okay one way or the other and i guess it says read up on shadow paging but i don't remember exactly why i had it in there um so to uh uh summarize uh some of this discussion and bring it together um we talked about steel and no force as in our desired uh properties steel means that a buffer manager is allowed to take a page from memory right to disk no force means that we are not requiring uh the system to write out updated data to disk before coming uh so our goal is that we want to be in this quadrant steel no force and effectively both redo and undo are required to make that happen undo is required to make to work with steel redo logs are required for no force but if you were in a scheme if you were in a system where steel was not allowed then you actually don't need the undo records for recovery purposes okay you still need them to handle uh transaction aborts but there are other ways to do it so you might see a diagram like this and that's kind of what it means it highlights that the main reason to say is it highlights that the redo records are required to handle the no force undo records are required to handle the steel issue okay so that's why we need those two types of records but there is a simplification okay um um acid property so again there's one thing i want to discuss uh which i guess i thought we had slides on but uh we don't um so let me let me show that one it was the um the compensation records that i talked about so you have t0 start t0 a and let's say t0 um or let let me add something more here now um t1 let's say t0 at this point decided uh that it wasn't going to continue so we about it which means we go backwards and undo this change but as i mentioned when we undo we write out a special record this is called a clr okay compensation log record it's a special record we write out and after that we write out and after that for instance t1 may get a lock on a and you might have t1 commit so the again the sequence here is that t0 started updated a t1 started t1 updated b t0 decided to abort so it wrote out a compensation record to change a back to 100 and then t0 aborted then t1 made a change to a and t1 committed okay the reason to show this is to show why we need those clr records the special records because remember our redo scheme is we start at the beginning and we kind of redo everything okay so we start here we change a from 100 to 150 we change b from 200 to 250 we change a back to 100 so we actually did double the work and then we change a from 100 to 200 so this record was required for us to make this scheme work the redo scheme work okay because if i did not have this record if i went ahead for the redo log and i changed a from 100 to 150 and i come here and now i have a problem i will in this case i will be correct in changing a to 200 but it's a bit weird that i'm changing a from 100 to 200 whereas the log record say that a should be 150 right now it works out in this example but in general it doesn't work out okay by having this extra clr record allowed me to essentially just redo all the records okay okay the schemes that don't use clr including the scheme discussed in the book they do not redo the aborted transactions okay so they have to keep track of transactions that were aborted and not redo them whereas the scheme we discussed which is actually simpler in many ways it does everything okay so that's why i need the clr records without the clr records this doesn't work okay um hopefully that made sense i realize there's a lot of content uh uh today so i'll try to post the notes uh as soon as i can and uh hopefully you can use that to refresh um this kind of ends our discussion of uh the asset properties in the context of a single system okay we're still going to talk about distributed transactions but for now uh for the centralized single machine systems like your postgreSQL on your machine this ends the discussion for that uh for atomicity and durability we uh essentially use logs undo redo and all of that uh for concurrency uh we use uh for isolation we use the concurrency schemes and there are uh strong interactions between these two we kind of need to assume strict two-phase locking uh for the recovery part okay so to prove correctness of the recovery we need strict two-phase locking okay now we spend a bunch of time talking about uh snapshot isolation and multi-version schemes and i mentioned that those are the ones dominantly used today so this might seem a bit weird the thing is even with the so let me go back to that figure we had with showing the interactions between things so snapshot isolation uh essentially means that i'm working primarily with my uh uh private copy of the data okay and when i'm ready to commit at that point i do a validation and i write this back the 2pl comes in while writing this back once i have decided that i am successful in committing that my validation passed at that point i will be copying this over and that copy happens using a form of strict 2pl okay so i still use strict 2pl but i only use it at the very end of the transaction just before i am ready to commit okay so in other words when in snapshot isolation when the transaction is ready to commit and it has changes to x and y it takes locks on x and y confirms that the validation is successful and if it is successful it writes x and y to the buffer and then releases the locks so that's kind of where the strict two-phase uh locking comes in even for schemes like snapshot isolation and you need that otherwise this doesn't work because remember no atomic write so there is no way for me to atomically write two values here i have to use some form of uh uh two-phase locking for that okay and at that point no one would call it strict two-phase locking because it's just i'm i'm taking all the locks i need on x and y and i release them so there's no sort of distinct phases but it is effectively uh uh two-phase locking so let me go back to where we were any questions on any of the stuff that we've discussed on centralized uh uh uh uh assay property implementation uh so we still have a few minutes but it's kind of uh weird uh that's not enough time for us to uh cover this topic but our last topic for next week is going to be distributed transactions um and basically we're going to talk about we are going to talk about uh how transactions uh are implemented in a distributed databases which is uh you know continues to be a uh major uh concern for uh uh for uh systems all over okay actually we have quite a few minutes so maybe i'll i'll set up the problem right now and then we'll uh finish it in the next next class um and again uh a distributed database so some of this stuff we have already talked about so just a review uh in a distributed database we have a bunch of uh sites uh or locations where the data is essentially distributed um and we have often a replication so which means that when i update an item let's say i have a data item dedicated here here and here if i update it here for asset properties i need to update it here and here okay so that's a distributed transaction but in some cases i might actually have my data one item a is here item b is here and i'm trying to update both of them that's a distributed transaction okay there are many variations here of how these systems are set up but the basic problem is the same i have a transaction that needs to update this and this and this at the same time in a in an atomic fashion okay and then the question is how do i do it okay in the last 20 years probably like 200 papers might be written on this topic okay i didn't want to say 100 i think 100 is too small i think 500 is a little too much somewhere in between okay but it could be 500 papers okay lot of papers written on this problem because it's a real problem that all the systems like you know facebook google they all deal with they need their own solutions for it and a ton of solutions have come out a ton of papers have been written out on on how to do this does anyone know what the canonical or what is the most famous scheme for doing distributed transaction is called distributed updates or distributed updates so it's a system it's a term that you might hear the protocol or the system is uh commonly called paxos p-a-x-o-s we're not going to cover paxos paxos takes two classes to cover at even at the graduate class i've tried covering it in graduate class and it took me over a class uh it's a very complicated scheme but we'll cover some simple variations of that um but it's a you know it continues to be a major problem for uh distributed databases on how to do this efficiently okay so let's stop here uh it doesn't make sense to get uh deeper into it and not finish so we'll continue from this point and again this will be the last topic uh we cover in this uh we cover in this class um hi um i don't mean to keep asking you about my grade but i'm graduating in three weeks so i'm just trying to like make sure everything's okay and i got the uh quiz four back and it was lower than the average but it was lower than the average but on the other ones i got like average or above so i was just wondering like if you if i my feeling is if you fail like one third of the class is going to have to fail and that's not gonna happen so i wouldn't worry about it wait what sorry i think you are you are all right so if i think that you are going to find what is going to happen so that's weird of you're doing at the Uniteditti crack in the west- at the south yeah all right do you think that it's going to do let me do that I just didn't know how it affected my overall grade. I'm going to try to post. So you're Sarah? Yeah. Bokikio. Yeah. You should be fine. If you stick at this range in the final, you should be fine. Okay. Easily. I'm just trying to... I'm going to try to post. Because of all these regrades and retakes and curving, it's been a little difficult to get clear cutoffs, but I'm going to try to post them. Okay. Very soon. Okay. So I was trying to decide if I should do the retake on Thursday or not, or just... That's up to you. I mean, it is below average. It's probably not... If you're not doing anything else and you think you can get at least this much score, it's probably worth doing, but it's also not required. Yeah. Okay. I'm assuming the cutoff was like... That one would be around like a C? C minus? Yeah, something like that. C plus probably, yeah. Okay. So that would probably be in a C plus range. Okay. All right. I'll think about it. Thank you. Sure. Sure. I just hope it was soon.

