 Let's continue with the transactions. So what we are talking about right now is the isolation part of transactions, which is when you have concurrent transactions that are running at the same time, how do we ensure that two of them don't cause problems for each other? And the formal definition of that is serializability. So we want, ideally we want serializability, as we'll discuss it a little bit later. We do end up relaxing serializability a bit because it ends up being too restrictive in practice. But still right now we are going to talk about serializability as our goal. So we talked about the locking-based schemes. Locking is a very natural scheme. That's what you use in practice. Before GitHub for instance, if you wanted to do a collaboration on something, you would kind of have to do that. You would basically say, okay, if you're working on a paper, you would say, okay, I'm going to work on paper one, you work on paper, or I'm going to work on section one, you work on section two. Right? That's kind of how we did collaborative editing back before GitHub became common. Right? Even with GitHub, it's often helpful to separate out the work. You say that I'm taking a lock on this section. Don't touch it till I'm done. And then you can release the lock. Right? It's a very similar mechanism to what transactions do. You take a lock before you begin the work, finish your work. After your work is done, you release the lock. Right? That's the key idea. And then there are all the nuances in there to make sure that this actually gives us isolation. Okay? That gives us the realizability. So what are other ways of doing this? There is actually quite a few other ways of doing it. Perhaps the most popular one right now is something called multi-version concurrency control. So we will work towards that in this class. And we should be able to finish it because we are only covering the high-level details. So first, I want to talk about a simpler scheme called... So I'm going to work this out because the slides have too much text on them. So timestamp based scheme. All of these schemes that we are going to discuss today, they are all based on timestamps. The locking base is not really... We did talk about timestamps a little bit in the deadlock detection part. But by and large, timestamps don't play an important role for locking base schemes. For all of the schemes we'll talk about today, they are all based on timestamps of one form or another. There is one very simple scheme. Which is that every transaction gets a timestamp of entry. Entry timestamp. And let's say T1 entered before T2. So what we are going to guarantee... We are going to guarantee that in the serialized security order, T1 appears before T2. So whatever final guarantee that we make is going to be based on entry timestamp. That in turn, the guarantee we are going to provide is that if T1 has a smaller entry timestamp based on this one, it appears before T2 in the serializable order. Okay. So what does that mean? That means that if T1 wants to read A and T2 has written the latest value of A. So imagine a situation where T1 wants to read a value, an object A, but the latest value of A was actually written by T2. Well, that's a problem for us. Okay. Because in this scheme, T1 is supposed to have happened before T2, which means that if T2 wrote something, T1 can't read it. In the global order that we are trying to get to, we want T1 to come before T2. Even though their actions are flipped, that doesn't really matter because my goal is to make it as if T1 happened before T2, which means that if T1 wants to read A, but the only available value is value written by T2, T1 cannot be allowed to do that. And if T1 is allowed to do that, then this order cannot be guaranteed. Okay. So this simple scheme will simply say about T1. Okay. So in this case, T1 will essentially stop executing and will restart. Okay. When it restart, it has to get a new timestamp, otherwise this will keep happening. Okay. So restart, but with a new timestamp. Okay. Make sense? Yeah. There is an alternative to this, which is that we keep the previous version of A. And we provide T1 access to that. Okay. Here, we are assuming that we only have one version, the latest version of A. But what if T1 could read the previous version of A? Okay. That gives us the multiversion concurrency control schemes. That's what we are going to work towards. It's called MVCC. Pretty much all modern databases use some version of MVCC. PostgreSQL also uses MVCC, but it also has locking. And Oracle also same thing. Oracle actually traditionally has used MVCC, a form of MVCC, but it has support for locking as well. So depending on the maturity of the database, you will kind of see different schemes. But if you were to build a new scheme today, you would use MVCC. Some version of MVCC. MVCC is more a family of techniques rather than one single technique. Any questions on why we did this here? Does this make sense? Okay. There is a second version of this, which is... Oh. So that's one if T1 wants to write A. But T2 has already read older value. Value of A. If my handwriting is fully eligible, let me know. And I'll try to write less. In this case, T1 wants to write A. So in that case, T1 wants to read A. T1 wants to write A. And it turns out that T2 has already read an older value. Again, I cannot proceed. Because in this serializability order, anything T1 wrote, T2 should have access to. But in this case, T2 has already read A. So again, we need to... About T2. About T1. And again, restart with a new timestamp. Okay. So that next time it will succeed. There is a possibility of starvation where T1 keeps getting aborted. And usually, in protocols like this, where this can happen, you add in special case logic to essentially just let T1 through. So maybe you block everyone else and just let T1 finish so that it doesn't keep getting killed again and again. Okay. So that's the two protocols we just talked about. So transaction that came in before has a lower timestamp. Correct. Okay. It's a basically... We just used the numbers as the timestamp. So one... T1 happened... T1 entered the system before T2. In order to keep track of this... By the way, even implementing this is not that straightforward because I need to keep track of who has returned what. So we are not really going to worry about that too much. Actually, we will just quickly discuss it. In order to actually do this protocol, do this technique, we need to maintain these timestamps. But it's not just the timestamps with the transactions. But I also need to keep track of when was the last time a data item was returned to. When was the last time a data item was read? When was the last time a data item was written? And so on. And given these two timestamps, then I can do this. So these are not the timestamps of the update, but rather the timestamps of the transactions that updated queue or the timestamp of the transaction that read queue. And those timestamps are enough to do the protocol. Okay. And so you can read through the details of it later. But basically, this is formalizing exactly the same thing that we just talked about. Okay. And we can see an example here. For instance, here is an example. The question is, is this schedule valid around under the timestamp ordering? So in this case, if you were to assume that the initial read and write timestamps for the items were zero, So what you see is that T25's read is fine. The last write timestamp was way before. This read is fine. This write is fine. Because so far, we don't really have any issues. So effectively, in this entire transaction, we don't end up with any violation of the rules. Because T25 tried to read A here, but T26 did not write A until afterwards. So we don't have a violation. This write B and this read B also don't conflict. So we don't end up with any violation. The reason to show this schedule is that this schedule will not be permitted under two-phase locking. Under two-phase locking, we would have to take a read lock here. And we would need to maintain it here. So read on B. Which means that these three instructions would not have happened. So it's an example of a schedule that is permitted under timestamp ordering that would have been rejected under locking. The problem with locking always is it's very pessimistic. You are kind of excluding things from happening. Even though there may not be any reason for it. And that's why people don't like locking in modern systems too much. This schedule is problematic. In this case, you have a real queue. Then T28 wrote a queue. And then T27 wrote a queue. Well, that's a problematic because T28 wrote. So the latest value of queue is actually written by T27. Where it should be the one written by T28. T28 happened after T27. In our sort of global view of the transactions. T28 happened after T27. But in this schedule, the two are flipped. So I can't allow this. So this schedule would fail under timestamp ordering. Yeah. If that T27 had a read queue again for the last write, then would it be done? No, because in this case, we are still going by the timestamps that are assigned to the transaction. So it would be invalid despite that. The other scheme that we'll talk about will actually doesn't. It's a question of when timestamps are assigned. In this case, the timestamps are assigned when you enter the system. When a transaction enters the system. And that's more pessimistic. If you assign timestamps later, then that works out. That can solve this problem. There is another example here. Actually, maybe let's not do this one. This one is easier to understand. Again, we have a lot of interleaving here. But in order to focus on the timestamp things, again, we have the timestamp order 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And we need to make sure that the read writes happen in the right order. So we have one violation here. So T2 tried to read Z, but the latest value of Z was written by T3. And so it results in killing T2 and restarting it. We are not showing the restart, but the assumption is that T2 restarted after this. We have a second violation here. T4 supposed to happen after T3, which means that the value that T4 read should have been this value that T3 just wrote. But T4 already read W. So T3 is again averted because this write is the one that gets cancelled. This write is the one that is rejected. This read is the read that is rejected. And that's why those two transactions are aborted. In this scheme, the transaction that does not satisfy the constraint, that's the one that gets killed, not the other one. So in this case, T4 would be allowed to proceed. A weird thing here that happened is that ultimately, so T2 got aborted because of T3. But ultimately, T2 was also aborted. So in some ways, T2's abort was not really required. But in any case, that's what happened in this scheme. Any questions? This make sense? All right. So in that case, let's talk about the second scheme. So the problem in some ways with this scheme, it is a very simple scheme. I don't know if there are any systems that actually implemented it. The problem with this scheme is that it's again also somewhat pessimistic because it's assigning the timestamps at the very beginning. Okay. So what about an alternative, right? What about an alternative where we take a more optimistic view? Okay. So this scheme was literally called optimistic concurrency control. Okay. OCC for short. OCC was optimistic in that what it said is, let the transactions continue as if there is... Go ahead. Oh, what did I do? Okay. I'll use the second page for except for this name. So the optimistic concurrency control, as it was named, basically said, let the transactions continue as if there is no conflict. At the very end, just before we are ready to commit the transaction, we'll confirm that there is no issue. Okay. Okay. So what it effectively means... I just want to make sure I follow the terminology we're using here. So we have a transaction T1. We have another transaction T2. Okay. We'll let this transaction continue. We'll let this transaction continue. Now this transaction says, okay, I'm done. It says, you know, I'm done. Okay. Okay. Now, we are going to enter a validation phase. Validation. Okay. Okay. In the validation phase, we are going to make sure that no other transaction that was concurrently running caused the problem. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So the way we do that is, during the execution of this transaction, we create a read set and we create a write set. Okay. Okay. Okay. These are the, all the objects that T1 read or wrote. So read set might be, for instance, read set might be A, B. right set might be B so real set might be A comma B right set might be B they are just items the list of items now the our serializability is going to be decided by this point so if the T2 entered its validation phase here then T2 will be given a later serializability order so in other words in the serializability order that we end up with finally T1 will be before T2 so ignore the 1 and 2 here that is not relevant that transaction on the left will appear before this transaction on the right because T2 entered validation after T1 so T1 entered validation first so what does this mean at this point T1 is going to check anyone else before me before me wrote so let's assume let's work with this read and write set wrote B anyone else before me read A or B actually that doesn't really matter let me confirm what exactly matters but the basic idea here is that in the validation phase I'm going to make sure that whatever updates I'm about to do which is B that these updates are actually correct okay okay and the way we're going to make sure is we're going to confirm that the values of A and B we read as T1 are the correct values of A and B okay so if there was another transaction let's say T3 that entered validation here okay so T3 entered validation before T1 if T3 wrote A then T1 should have read that one okay because T3 entered validation before T1 so if T3 and let's assume that T3 actually finished commit if T3 aborted we don't care about it but if T3 committed that means that T1 must have read or should have read the value of A or B that T3 wrote okay makes sense that's the validation check we're going to do and now finally we need to confirm that you know T1 actually read those correct values because we don't really know what value T1 read so T1 is going to keep track of that as well what values it read and it's going to confirm that the value it read is the correct value okay so that's the basic idea behind the validation in the validation we confirm that what we read and wrote matches with what we expect to happen okay and then there are a bunch of rules around it so we'll show you the rules but that's a key idea okay the validation entry time that's the time of serializability order so that's the time we use for serializability order then all we're going to do is make sure that the read read sets match okay so let's let's see the actual and this is called optimistic because the hope is that there won't be too many validation failures okay so if we in effect if there are lots of transactions but not much conflict in that case you don't really expect validation errors and that's the hope okay so that's why it's optimistic because you don't take locks so you have no overhead of locking you do need some locks you kind of need to take a lock around the validation phase but generally you don't need locks and if there are very few conflicts very few concurrent transactions that actually conflict then then you are in a good place okay so let's get back to the actual details here now in order to maintain these protocols you just need there's just a bunch of rules my the thing to take away here is the overall idea you should be able to derive the rules or even read them afterwards but the key idea is to understand how this works each transaction has multiple timestamps the start timestamp it doesn't matter too much validation timestamp and the finish timestamp we care about finish because finish is the time where a transaction finishes writing the items so we kind of care about that okay so these things we already talked about so what is the what is the validation phase what does the validation phase do it confirms that for any transaction for which the timestamp this is the validation timestamp yeah so validation timestamp for any transaction any two transactions if TI's validation timestamp is before TJ's validation timestamp then TI must finish before TJ starts so use this one so so so so we have TI and we have TJ so we have TI and we have TJ that yeah unfortunately we have two guy I DON'T he państwa So TI is validation timestamp before TJ's validation timestamp. So TI is in serializable order before. So we need one of the three conditions to be satisfied. We need that TI is finished before TJ starts. In that case we have no issues because TJ would simply read everything that TI wrote. There is no conflict in this case. On the other hand, if we are in a situation where TJ started, TI finished and TJ validation. So TJ started before TI finished and TJ validated after TI finished. Now we have a little bit of a problem because it is possible that TJ read something that's an older value of an item that TI wrote. We need it to be the case that whatever TI wrote, TJ read. But it is possible that T1 wrote A, B here and TJ read B here. So TJ read B here. That we cannot allow to happen. So that's what the validation is going to check. Validation is going to confirm that if you have a situation where TJ's execution overlap with TI's finish, then you need to make sure that the read write sets are consistent. In particular, we need to be the case that the read set for TJ is distinct from write set for TI. So anything that's in TI's write set is not in TJ's read set because we need to make sure that TJ by mistake did not read something that's an older value. And that's kind of all the validation check is doing. So you see this here. Start of TJ is before finish of TI, which is before validation of TJ. The set of data items that TI wrote does not intersect the set of data items that TJ read. And that's it. If this is the case, then we are good. We don't need to worry about other situations, but this is the validation check we need to make. So when TJ entered the validation phase, it's going to look for TI's that satisfy this condition and then going to confirm that the read and write sets don't intersect. So if you have any questions, any questions on this? And I know there is some detail in here which you may not really understand here. So focus on the high level ideas, which is that we are trying to play with the timestamps to try to maximize the chance that transactions finish. Goal of concurrency control is to get as many transactions to finish as possible. The simplest option is just to let a single transaction through at any time. Simplest option, lowest concurrency. Works just fine from a correctness perspective. So in many ways, the concurrency control are to keep sort of chipping away at this thing so that we can let more and more transactions through. And that's why we still see papers on this topic in the research conferences because people are still trying to figure this one out. This is an example of a schedule. P25 read B, read A, entered validation, no issues here. So because the validate of T26 is after T25, we basically have no conflict here at all. When T25 entered the validate phase, even though these updates happened, they happened in local storage. They did not happen in global storage. So they happened locally in the in-memory state for the transaction, only at this point where the updates made public. So T25 never read these values. So we have no issues. And T25 is a read-only transaction, so T26 cannot conflict with that. Another benefit of optimistic concurrency control is also the... Actually, no, that's not true. They are better for read-only transactions, but not entirely. Any questions? So... This is an example, like a minor variation on this example. You'll see the reason why... No, wrong. Wait, I want to keep that example up. So, a minor variation on that example that... So, read B, read A, read B, B minus 50, read A. So, this part, validate. Write B, write A, and validate. Okay. So, it's a minor variation on this thing. T1 red B, T1 red A validated, T2 red B, red A updated both of them, validated successfully and wrote the values. This one we have a problem because in this case when T1 entered the validation phase, its read site had A and B T2 finished in between and updated A and B. So in this case the validation for T1 will actually fail because T1's read site and T2's write site intersect. The question is, is there a reason for it to fail? Because T1, red older values of A and B, whatever values of A and B it read, were actually consistent. It wasn't really a particular issue with them. And this is what the one of the the multi-version concurrency control schemes give you. In some ways, when I keep track of the older versions of an item, I can let a transaction, especially a read-only transaction, sort of continue on the older versions. And that allows me to get much better performance for read queries. Because remember, in systems like this, read queries are happening simultaneously with write queries. And I'd like to make sure that my read queries also go through fast. But even optimistic concurrency control has a problem with it because even read queries have to go through the variation phase. Instead, imagine a situation where... So I'm drawing a slightly different way to draw this. So this is time. Okay. So this is time like this. These are the values of A at various points in time. So initially, the value of A was A1. At some point, it got updated to A2. At some point, it got updated to A3. Same with B. It got updated. And let's say T1, the transaction that wanted to read A and B, entered the system. And let's say this is B1. Let's say T1 entered the system at this point. Okay. And then T1 sort of is going on. It tries to read A. So read A is A1. So here, it tried to read A. It got the value A1. Then it went on and then it said read B. But the read B happened here. And so it read B2. Okay. So read B happened a bit later and it read B2. Okay. That's what happens in most systems. You read the latest value of B. Right. And in this place, when transaction 1 tried to do read B, it read this value of B. But instead of that, what if it could read the older value of B? Okay. So it's as if you took a snapshot of the database right here and anytime T1 wanted to read something, you gave it a value as of that type point. Okay. So if T1 said I want to read B, you're like, I don't care what the latest value is. What was the value at this type? Well, the value was B1. So I'll give you B1. So anytime T tries to read it, T1 tries to read an item, we give it an item value as of this type point. Okay. That's called snapshot isolation. Okay. We'll talk about that in a couple of slides. But it's a variation on optimistic which is very clearly better for read queries. Because read queries never cause any conflicts under this scheme. Read queries will always read consistent data as of a particular time point and they will always succeed and they don't interfere with the right queries. Okay. So read queries never interfere with right queries. That's the big benefit of snapshot isolation which can be seen as a variation on optimistic concurrency control. So before we get to that, any other, any questions on this optimistic concurrency control so far? So for instance, let's imagine that this schedule is happening. Okay. So we have a T1 which started read and wrote A then after another step it wrote read and wrote B entered validate. T2 did read A read B write B validate. T3 did read A read B validate. So the question is what are the checks that are happening? Well, in this validate, this validate is before the validate of any of the other transactions so T2's validate doesn't worry about anything. There is no other transaction we are only assuming we have only these three transactions so when T2 entered the validate state there is no other transaction before it. So T2's validation step just goes through. Now next one to enter validation is T1. So now T1 has to decide whether there is a conflict. So T1 read A and B T2 wrote B and T1 started before T2. As a result of it we can't let T2 validate. So T1 will fail because at this point there is a possibility in fact we can see it although we don't see it. T2 wrote B T1 wrote B or read B sorry. So T1's read B actually happens after this write B but that doesn't matter because it will fail the validation rule since it would have read an older value of B. T3. And then when we come to T3 T3 started after this validated so T3 does not have a problem either. So that's the reasoning that you have to be able to work out for this scheme to see which transactions successfully commit and which don't. any questions on this example here? All right. So then let's talk about snapshot isolation. Snapshot isolation is probably the most common scheme that's used today. PostgreSQL uses it as its primary scheme. Oracle has used it for the longest time. It's a form of multiversion concurrency control. As I said, MVCC or multiversion concurrency control is more a style of concurrency control rather than one scheme and snapshot isolation is a version of it. It can be a little bit hard to tell what is the difference between snapshot isolation and one of the other schemes. So as I was showing earlier, in snapshot isolation, we keep track of previous versions of the data. For any object in the database, we keep track of the prior versions. Now, for read queries, as I was just showing earlier, in a sense what we do is we let read queries read an older version of the data at all times. So if I were to go back to this example that we were seeing here, so here I have the older version of A is A1, A2, A3, B's older versions are B1, B2, B3, latest version is B4. If a transaction started at this time, if a read query started at this time, we always give it the older version of the deriver. We don't give it a newer version. Similarly, if a read query started here, no matter when it asks for A, we'll always give it A2, no matter when it asks for B, we'll always give it B4, even if B has been updated since then. Because B4 is the latest value of B as of this timestamp. So that's called a snapshot. We're taking a snapshot of the database in effect and that snapshot is the one that we provide to the transaction. The benefit of this scheme is that for a read query, there is no locks needed, you don't wait on any other transaction, you just continue. The read queries never fail in this scheme. Read queries always read consistent data, even if it's older data, it's a consistent data and they always execute. Now, it is possible that you might say you run your query, all it's doing is read query, it started here and it continued executing, it continued executing for an hour, let's say. Then it produced a result and you look at the result and you look at the database and you look at this result doesn't make any sense. You're telling me a plus b is 100 but I see the values of a and b right now and they're actually 10,000. Well, yeah, because the read query read older data, it is consistent but it's not necessarily consistent with the current state of the world. It's consistent with the older state of the world. From a database serializability perspective, it's perfectly okay. From the user experience, there might be some questions. Now, this is not a common situation so we're not worried about it but there is a gap there because the transaction read older values so even if it read consistent values, they were older values. any questions on the read queries and why they do not fail in this scheme? And that's a big benefit of these queries. A snapshot isolation gets used by almost all databases for read queries because they just make sense. Write queries are a little bit more complicated. write queries look something like optimistic concurrency control. So what you do is at the commit time, just like we had a validation phase in at commit time, we basically do some sort of a validation check and which looks very similar to what we saw in the optimistic concurrency control. And for every object that we want to write, we check if some other transaction has already written it. And if yes, we sort of fail the validation and restart. So the update queries part looks very similar with some caveats to optimistic concurrency control. And there is a lot of overlap between these techniques even though people don't seem to discuss snapshot isolation together with OCC but to me they look very similar in most ways. Here is an example of a few transactions. t1 here wrote y equal to 1 and committed. t2, actually I'm not sure why I even have t1 here. Okay, I guess t3 was going on in parallel here as well. So t3 also started before t1. t2 started, read a value of x equal to 0, y equal to 1. In between, t3 came and wrote new values of x and z. I know I'm using slightly different notation here because I needed to do the actual values. So t3 wrote x equal to 2 and z equal to 3 and committed. At this point, when t2 tried to read z, it still sees an older value of z. Even though new value of z is 3, this z is still older value of z. Similarly, if it reads a y, in this case y wasn't updated, but if it read a y, it would read an older value of y as well, whichever this value. Then it tried to write x equal to 3, which is fine. Again, this write is in private storage. So at this point, no one else can see it. Same here. These writes right now are in private storage. Only at commit time are they made public. At this time, t2 said, okay, now I want to write x. Well, that write x is going to fail because when it tries to commit, it sees a conflict here. Latest value of x was written by t3. T2 also tries to write x. That fails. And so this, because t3 committed after t2 started, we have a possibility of an overlapping write. In this case, there is an overlapping write and that fails. t2 has to be t2. t2 can only commit if no other concurrent transaction has already written that value. So in this case, x, it wants to write x. Another transaction wrote x that was concurrent and so t2 has to be uploaded. So again, very similar to OCC with some minor variations. There is another example. This is actually from one of the exams or something. So first question here is, hopefully you can read it. But one question here is, what value of A will t2 read? Okay. So if I'm looking here, what value of A does t2 read? Okay. Anyone want to give a quick answer? So in this case, the answer is kind of obvious that it has already read A equal to 1. So it will always read the same value. No matter what happened, if it already read a value equal to 1, it's going to read the same value. Because that's the value of that snapshot. A is equal to 1 in that snapshot, so it's always going to read that. But if I'm not doing that, I have to go backwards and kind of look at the last read of A that I see as of the start time. So this write of A happened afterwards, so I don't care about this one. And then before that I have the value of A equal to 1, so that's the one that t2 reads. Okay. So that is 1. 1. But this one, say A, this one started after t3 committed. So the value of A that t5 will read will be 2. Okay. It's as of the start time. And as of the start time, the value of A was 2. So this one is going to be 2. Make sense? Just a snapshot. As of the time start, whatever the value was. Of the three transactions that currently have a commit request, that is they're waiting to commit, that are in some sense in a validation phase, which one of them will commit? commit. So what about t1? Would t1 be allowed to commit? No. So we have a concurrent transaction that wrote a value of t1 that is already committed. So t3, t1, so t3 has already committed, written A, t1 cannot be allowed to commit. because t1 started before t3 finished. So that's t3 finished, t1 start, so I can't let t1 finish. t2 wants to commit. Now t2 has read A, an older value of A, which is not the latest value of A, but in the snapshot isolation rule, we only look at right sets, and I'll explain why that's a problem. But in snapshot isolation rules, we only look at the right sets. As a result of it, t2 will be allowed to commit. Because t2's right set is B, and the concurrent transactions, none of them are updating B. As a result of it, t2 will be allowed to commit, which is actually a problem. Not in this case, but in general it's a problem. And then t4 wants to commit, but t4 does not even have a commit, like a validation phase. t4 is a read transaction, doesn't even have a validation phase. So even though I've said in this example that it's waiting to commit, it can actually go ahead and commit. There is no validation required for read queries. That's a big benefit of techniques like snapshot isolation. any questions? Any questions? There is another example in the slides that you can look at, but let me move on to the problems with it, and then actually we'll probably just end early because I don't think I really want to start the next topic. so the advantages of snapshot isolation are that the read queries don't block in any way, they can just continue. Updates are actually pretty good in general. overall, there is better performance than locking based protocols. That's why they're widely used today. Major disadvantages are that they're not actually consistent. It's not guaranteed to be serialized. Which is the problem. So Oracle for the longest time used snapshot isolation even though it was known that snapshot isolation is vulnerable to a particular type of inconsistency. And it turned out people later on showed that the primary benchmarks that were being used, they would never result in that inconsistency. So it was almost a problem with the benchmark that you could never see a problem with snapshot isolation. Even though it was known in theory that they could cause problems. Snapshot isolation can be fixed with introducing read sets to become serializable but many of these implementations don't use that and they are just running the snapshot isolation that we just saw and that is potentially inconsistent. So here is a problem. let me actually try to do it on board as steps on the paper. So the two transactions are doing something really simple. So this is T1, this is T2. T1 says start, read x equal to let's say 10, read y equal to 20 and this is write x. So both of these transactions are actually trying to flip x and y. write x equal to 20. So read x and let's say that gave you 10, read y and give you 20, then you update x to be 20. So you update x to be the value of y. Then T2 starts, it does the same things but in the reverse order. So it reads y equal to 20, it reads x equal to 10 and then it writes x equal to, wait no, it writes y equal to 10. The intention of both of these transactions is to make x and y the same. So one of them sets the value of y to be the same as, value of x to be the same as y, the other one sets the value of y to be the same as x and they are running concurrently. Now they go into the commit request. Commit request. So both of them try to commit. The problem is their write sets don't intersect. This transaction wrote y, that transaction wrote x. So the snapshot isolations check, which is to check the write sets, it doesn't fail. And as a result of it, both the transactions commit. As a result of it, we end up with a value of x equal to 20 and y equal to 10. So instead of making both of them the same, we ended up with effectively swapping the two, which is not serializable. Neither of these two transactions swaps them. There is no serial order in which they will get swapped. If t1 happened before t2, both of them will be 20. If t2 happened before t1, both of them will be 10. So the 20-10 answer here from the original 10-20 is not serializable. And so this is a problem with, very simple problem with snapshot isolation, which has been known for a long time, but is not that easy to fix. The way to fix it is to look at the read sets. So if you go back to the example that we were looking at, in addition to checking the right set, if I were to check the read sets, I would say, okay, did someone else write a value that I read? Well, that will fail because this transaction, read x and y, and this one wrote y, and same way, whichever one tries to validate later will fail. So if this validated later, it will fail. If you look at the read sets, but keeping track of the read sets is expensive. Write sets, most transactions don't tend to write a lot of stuff, but they tend to read a lot of stuff. So keeping track of the read sets gets expensive, keeping track of write sets is relatively easier. So from a performance perspective, keeping track of the read sets is too much work. You can also do this with, were there any questions on this? So the takeaway here is snapshotization works great for read queries, but has inconsistency problem for updates. But generally speaking, those updates are not common enough that people basically don't worry about them. they're willing to live with the inconsistency even though it is possible you end up with inconsistent database. So they're willing to sort of be okay with that. Another example that you can see is something like this. So you try to find a max order, so you want to add a new order, so two transactions running concurrently, both try to find a maximum order number and then create a new order with the next number. The problem is if they're running concurrently then there is again no intersection between the right sets because this one wrote a, both of the transactions write a new data item, so there is no conflict. So that can also fail. the problem is not necessarily because snapshot resolution is not serializable. As long as you know that it's not serializable. In PostgreSQL, in Oracle, if you ask the database to be serializable, it will use snapshot resolution, which is not serializable. That's a problem. In PostgreSQL until version 9.1 essentially did not have serializable. Oracle also did not really have a serializable option at all. The best they could offer was snapshot isolation. And snapshot isolation is vulnerable to the inconsistency that we talked about. So Oracle and PostgreSQL up to 9.1 now, I know we are way past that now, we are at like 16 or something, but till about 10 years, 15 years ago, PostgreSQL did not support true serializability. In 9.1 there was an academic work that added a serializable snapshot isolation to PostgreSQL, but again this is not the one that's the default. The default is the other one because it's more expensive. You have to keep track of all these all these sorry, I'm just trying to check for something. So you have to keep track of all these write sets which can get expensive. Any questions so far? There's one, we have a couple more slides and then we'll stop. I just remembered that there was something again missing from the slides. Let me just confirm that we have covered the topic because this is the last class we'll have on concurrency and after that we're going to move into what is called recovery starting in the next class. What did I do with that? What did I do with that? What did I do with that? What did I do with that? this is all right. Any questions on any of these protocols we talked about? So let me quickly describe something that's also part of this whole isolation level stuff that we'll discuss briefly and then we'll stop. we've already talked about serializability serializability is our most like the best guarantee we can have, serializability means that any interleaving that happened is not a problem we get you know it's as if the transactions happened one after the other and the effect is consistent the thing is serializability is considered too expensive which is why we have protocols like snapshot isolation which are more efficient than true serializability the SQL standard in fact offers three other consistency levels they are defined in the standard itself which means that databases support them, the way you use them is you tell the database I'm okay with a lower consistency standard, I'm okay to live with it, the problem with a lower consistency standard is that that means your database might become inconsistent and you will have to fix it somehow the in the SQL standard there are three desirable properties that are stated and those desirable properties the only reason I'm putting it up here is because they are kind of useful to as a sort of as something to understand because they help you understand the isolation level but they're also just interesting to know because most databases today especially NoSQL databases still suffer from these problems so the three desirable properties are called these three they are called NoPhantom repeatable read and no dirty reads so what do I mean by that so imagine so the first one NoPhantom we are going to explain this in terms of using an example to show what what a phantom is so here is an example we have a schema we have a table accounts there are two transactions one transaction is find a number of accounts in 2742 and divide a million between them ok so whatever accounts you have 100 accounts it's a price money you want to distribute it across whatever number of accounts you find in the college class zip code ok a second transaction at the same time is going to add a new Tupel in that zip code ok now the problematic situation happens this way transaction 1 counts the number of accounts let's say it ends up with 100 ok transaction 1 computes the share for every account that's 10,000 ok 1 million price money 100 accounts 10,000 each transaction 2 goes ahead and inserts the new account with the same zip code ok so transaction 2 added a new account with 207.2 transaction 1 continued it went through the relation and added 10,000 to every account ok because that's the logic right the logic is count the number of accounts find the share add it to every account but now we have a problem because in between steps 2 and 4 we have a new phantom Tupel it's called phantom because it wasn't there before now it's there ok from the perspective of this transaction this Tupel actually did not exist and now it's suddenly there now if the logic in this transaction is appropriate it will detect this but in many cases because this transaction is just written like this it will not detect it and go ahead and give 10,000 to every account in other words instead of distributing a million dollars it distributed a million dollars plus 10,000 ok which is a problem for someone so this is called a phantom phenomenon and we want to avoid it and it's very hard to avoid this this particular phenomenon is a primary reason why databases are not serializable because a serializable schedule will not allow this to happen right it will one way or another it will make sure that the money is distributed to exactly 100 accounts but actually ensuring this is not straightforward even the locking protocol that we discussed doesn't really solve it you have to take locks in the right way make sense any questions on this so this is called the phantom phenomenon even if you we haven't discussed how to fix it how to actually protect against it but just keep an eye on the the goal here was to tell you about the phenomena more than about how to fix it second problem is a much simpler problem it's called repeatable read so transaction 1 reads the account twice transaction 2 updates it so transaction 1 reads the account transaction 2 in between updates it transaction 1 re-reads the account now the question is does the transaction 1 get the same value in both cases in snapshot isolation it will get the same value but depending on the scheme we use it might not actually get the same value because transaction 2 may have committed in between so it might get the second time it might read a different value so this is called repeatable read we want to ensure that if a transaction tries to read the same value twice it actually gets same value twice it doesn't get different values so this phenomena which you might consider to be very natural is called repeatable read and in fact is not guaranteed under the weaker isolation levels the last one is what's called dirty read dirty read basically means it's something we talked about before it's the cascading aborts or cascadeless recovery recoverable schedules sorry it's a recoverable schedule transaction 1 reads something does some work transaction 2 updates 10-0-5-4-9 transaction 1 reads again 10-0-5-4-9 at this point basically the problem is that transaction 1 has read a value that is potentially written by a transaction another transaction that has not finished okay so dirty here refers to uncommitted transaction 1 read an uncommitted value okay and so that's the phenomena of no dirty read we would like to avoid dirty reads so you might think why would we ever allow this so this was the SQL standard till not too long ago and you can in fact see it on PostgreSQL's website also in PostgreSQL and many databases will allow you to effectively choose will allow you to choose the isolation level so in the read uncommitted isolation level all of these problems are possible in the read committed one only dirty read is disallowed in repeatable read isolation level these two are disallowed or sorry these two are allowed but those two are disallowed in serializable none of them are allowed okay so and this is the problem is because these are actually supported in modern databases like PostgreSQL you can set the isolation level for your database to be this which gives you slightly better performance but you have the possibility of all of these things happening okay and you can go to PostgreSQL's website manual and actually see all of this being discussed there this was when I took the screenshot was from PostgreSQL's website and this is how you set the transaction mode you can say set transaction and you can say serializable or you can say read is uncommitted and then write your transaction here okay and there's all kinds of problems with this okay which people have been trying to fix this was proposed in the very first paper on transactions like not very first but one of the first seminal papers on transactions had a table like this and it took people about 25 years to fix the problems that came out of that table okay and that's a that's a topic for a graduate more deeper course but I mainly wanted to make sure I covered the notions of weak levels of isolation and what they're trying to do okay you can you don't have to worry about this for the exam this is more advanced topic than that any questions in many database systems the read committed is the default so you actually have to change it if you want serializable MySQL InnoDB which is a version of MySQL with the InnoDB storage engine defaults to repeatable read Oracle does not have repeatable read and DB2 actually has serial it is all kinds of complexity DB2 has something called read stability which is different from serializable but similar to repeatable read and so on lot of nuances once you get to this level of detail in here the main takeaway I wanted to take was this phenomenon and why we care about it any questions let's stop here the topic for next class after the quiz we'll start discussing the recovery which is the second last topic in transactions and after we are done with recovery we'll talk about distributed transactions which will be like the last thing last topic for this course otherwise if no questions I'll see you on Thursday for the quiz for the quiz take there each hour thank youoo one