 So I held off on that. So the next topic for us in the transactions is the topic of what's often called recovery. Recovery is about recovering from failures. Failures of many different kinds. So we'll talk about what kinds of failures, why we care about them, what we can do. Today we'll do some overview and start with some basic terminology. So recovery, roughly speaking, is both about atomicity and durability. So remember the four guarantees that we wanted from transactions. If I were to go back to the beginning, we talked about the ACID guarantees. Atomicity is the guarantee that we do entire transaction of nothing. The system is a bit of a weird one, but we don't really care about that directly. Isolation is that if you have the current transactions, they don't interfere. Even if they do interfere, they don't interfere. Even if the instructions are interleaved, we don't run into problems. And durability is that the effects of committed transaction are not lost. So what we're going to talk about is primarily about A and B, atomicity and durability. It does intersect with isolation, but we'll make some assumptions. We'll basically assume that we use locking. That simplifies our discussion of atomicity and durability, and it's mostly correct. Just to remind you of these properties once again. So there's sort of examples of why we care about recovery. This doesn't actually show the commit part of it, but it shows the atomicity part of it. For instance, this transaction is updating salaries for all the instructors. Well, if only part of it is completed, we can have a problem. This one is also we are deleting the prerequisite, adding a new one. If the first one gets executed, but not the second one, we have a problem. Atomicity is about the entire transaction getting executed without any problems. And durability, which I don't have an example here, but imagine that you printed out a receipt for the user or send an email saying your transaction is successfully completed. And then the user, let's say the undergrad office, comes back tomorrow and suddenly this is not there anymore. It's as if the transaction didn't happen. So once you commit a transaction, the effects of that transaction should persist. That's what durability is about. And the problem for both of these primarily are about system crashes. So, let's start talking about system crashes. So, we'll start with talking about why is it difficult to guarantee atomicity durability and then discuss this notion of steel and force, which is slightly different from the terminology used in the book. So, if you do for this one part, if you read the book, you will see a somewhat different terminology than what we used, what we are going to use in our slides. So, what are the problems with atomicity and durability? Like why is it challenging? Or what is the thing we need to watch out for? For atomicity, we can have two problems. One problem is at various points in our protocols, we talked about killing transactions. The transactions might self-abort because it ran into an issue. The user might kill a transaction halfway through. You often do that. You go through steps and then you say, okay, I don't care and you stop. So, and then for deadlock prevention or recovery, you might kill some transactions. In any of these cases, we have the problem that the transaction has done part of the work and we are killing it, one reason or the other. So, we have to undo the changes it made. We can't just kill a transaction, it made some changes. We need to make sure that those changes are undone. Secondly, the system might crash during a transaction. This is the more problematic one, so we focus on this because this kind of covers this as well. If the system crashes during the transaction, you have a problem that some changes that does, the transaction date may have made it to the disk, may have been permanent in some sense, but the transaction isn't finished. So, we again need to figure out how we are going to undo it. And the durability problem is that the transaction is finished, but the changes are not on disk. So, let's, we'll discuss this in a bit more detail. Typically, atomicity and durability have been handled as a single unit because they overlap too much. Even though they are separate guarantees, they're kind of very similar in many ways. What kinds of crashes we care about? We care about transaction failures. A transaction may just not complete for any reason. Often transactions have if conditions and it might run into if condition and sort of cancel. There might be a system error, like the database system has to kill a transaction because it ran into a deadlock. System crashes are really the one we care about more because that subsumes this in large part. You might have a power failure. You might have an operating system bug. Any reasons, any number of reasons why your system crashed. And the question is, what about all the transactions that were still running? Okay. Um, now one critical assumption that we make is that we assume that the, the disk contents are not corrupted. Okay. Okay. Because if during the, during let's say operating system bug, if the, if the operating system were to rewrite the disk, we can't protect against that. Okay. So databases have other mechanisms for it, but we won't discuss that. So our assumption, we have made two assumptions kind of. One is that we assume that, uh, the disk contents are not corrupted by the system crash. And secondly, we assume that the data on a disk is not lost. Okay. Uh, again, that's not a safe assumption because, uh, some of the disk crashes are catastrophic crashes. Like the disk head touching the platter, in which case all the data on that disk is gone. Okay. So we are going to assume that, um, the disk is, uh, uh, uh, is, uh, fine. Okay. The way we solve for this problem is by keeping a separate second copy of the disk. Right. So the entire data on the disk is usually copied into a second place. So that's a separate, uh, sort of a solution. So for now we, we assume that the disk, uh, uh, uh, the data on disk is not lost. So disk might stop because of power failure, but we won't lose the data on it. Okay. So for us, in some ways, disk is a permanent, I mean, it can be modified, but disk is, uh, non-fail, like disk doesn't fail for us. Okay. Anything we write to disk will be there when we can come back. That's an important assumption and the way we get to that assumption is through, through these, these two things. Okay. Uh, so it's not an actual assumption made in practice. Just for our purposes, we are going to make that assumption. Just to simplify our discussion. Any questions on this? Does it make sense? Does it make sense? Okay. Um, changes are written to disk only when the transaction ends or while the transaction is going on, the changes? So that's a very important question. So let's repeat the question. Are changes made by a transaction only returned to the disk after the transaction ends? And the answer is no. Okay. For performance reasons, it is not guaranteed that transaction changes can be held until the transaction finishes. So it is possible that a transaction is still running and the changes are on disk. That's actually one of the problems for us. Okay. Uh, the problem is that there is a transaction that is still running. Some of its updates made it to the disk. Like you look at that instructor salary increased one. Some of those updates made it to the disk and some are not made it to the disk and the system crashes. Right? That's kind of the scenario that we need to protect against. Okay. We'll talk about these things in more detail. Okay. Any other questions on the slide so far? Um, so, uh, we are going to guarantee A and D atomicity and durability by basically putting some requirements on the disk and memory. And we'll talk about those. Uh, then we'll, we'll discuss what kind of logs need to be maintained. All of these approaches are based on logs. Okay. Uh, you keep track of all the updates you, uh, did through some sort of a log. Okay. And then, uh, we'll, we'll discuss, uh, uh, uh, it uses the word algorithm. It's not really algorithm. More like just a technique to recover the database state. Assumption, system may crash, uh, but the disk is durable. Uh, the only atomicity guarantee we have is that a disk block is, uh, is, uh, atomic. Okay. Disk block right is an atomic. Okay. So if a transaction needs to update five things, which is five things, then we'll, you'll have five different blocks. We have no operation that can atomically update the five disk blocks. We have to update them one at a time. And we have to protect against the possibility that the system crashes halfway through that. Okay. So you cannot say, here are the five blocks, write them to disk simultaneously. That operation does not exist for us. Okay. We have to be able to write them block at a time. Okay. Uh, and technically even disk block writes are not atomic. They are, this is guaranteed by the software. Uh, the only guarantee the disk actually provides at the hardware level is that of a sector write. It guarantees that a sector write is, is, is atomic. Okay. And a block is made up of sectors. So to get the disk block write being atomic, you actually need to put some software solution in place. But that's done by the disk. Okay. Um, some definitions, uh, and then we'll, uh, we'll, we'll, we'll, uh, discuss some, um, I will start discussing solutions. Um, we'll use the word physical block to refer to the blocks that reside on the disk. Uh, buffer blocks are the ones in memory. Okay. And then we're going to introduce two new operations because we need to, because we need to worry about what's in memory, what's in disk. We're going to introduce two new operations to keep track of that. Okay. So in particular, we're going to have an input operation, which is an operation that brings a physical block from disk to memory. Then we have an output operation, which, uh, uh, transfers the block, uh, from, uh, memory to disk. Okay. Uh, and we're going to assume that we don't have data icon, but we're going to have a number of problems that span multiple blocks. And that assumption can also be handled, uh, relatively easily. So here's what the things look for us a little bit. And again, we have to get into one more level of detail that we have done so far, because we need to be able to account for memory and disk. Okay. So in this figure, for whatever reason, disk is on the right and memory is on the left. Okay. So this is the, let's make sure we understand this setup here. Okay. We have, uh, A and B, which are the, uh, two blocks we have here. Okay. This is the buffer. That's the memory that's basically shared between all the transactions, all the queries, all the transactions. Then, in most cases, the transaction has its own sort of private area that is not accessible to anyone else. Okay. Uh, only transaction has access to it. It's like the memory of a process. Right? The memory of a process that is only accessible to that. So that's the work area for T1, that's the work area for T1. Uh, and so an input operation will take a block from here, copy it out here. Output operation will take a block from here, copy it out here. And then, when a transaction needs a data item, let's say X, it is going to copy that from the buffer into its own private location to operate upon it. Okay. Uh, so this, X1 here is potentially the same value as X here, but it's a, my own private copy. And similarly, T2, if T2 is also operating on X at the same time, T2 will also have a copy of X in its own location. Okay. These copies may be different because the transaction is working on them. So it, when it originally copied them, both of them got the same value of X because they both read from here, but then T1 might have worked on it afterwards. So this value might be a different value than this one. The read and write operation that we have been talking about are, are these operations. Okay. So when T1 says write, you take this Y and write it here. Okay. At this point, because this buffer is shared between everyone, this new value of Y is now accessible to everyone else. That's why that write is a, it's like, it's making my updates global. Till that point, I am making all of my updates locally. At the very end, or whenever I do, I will make them public. Okay. Let me pause here for a second. I am going to keep discussing it, but any questions so far? And I know there is a few different operations here, but you kind of need to understand that, otherwise some of the discussion doesn't make sense. Transactions are not performed by the instructions. No. Transactions are made up of instructions. Each instruction is atomic. Yeah. What does atomicity mean again? All or nothing. Atomicity is all or nothing. So when you say something is atomic, it means that it will be executed as a unit or not, or not at all. Either it's fine, but it has to be a whole thing. Okay. Atomicity has to be guaranteed at the hardware level. I don't know how many of you sort of have encountered this. Does anyone know how, what the atomicity guarantee at the hardware level, at the processor level looks like? No. Yeah. Right. But there is a, so there is correct mostly, just that there is a, the processors need to support a specific instruction for all of this to work. Okay. And in fact, the earliest processors did not have that instruction. By earliest, I mean 50, 60 years old. Okay. They needed an instruction, so that two processors that are, two processes, two separate threads of execution don't interfere. And it's this instruction called compare and swap, or C-A-S for short. Without that instruction, you can't actually have some of these guarantees. Now all modern processors have it, so it's not an issue. But even at the hardware level, you need some support for atomicity. Okay. Anyway, any questions on this? Is that what, like the functions or whatever, like atomic . Which function? In the, like C-Inc. Atomic data . That's what it's compiled down to. In most cases, I would expect, sorry, I'm not familiar with that specific, but the mutexs, semaphores, they all require support, like they all use that operation. Because in order, if you have two separate execution threads that are going through, they both want to access the same, let's say, memory location or whatever, right? Only one of them should be allowed in. Okay. So the problem is, how do you guarantee only one of them gets it, right? So you say, okay, there is a bit here. Let's say there's only one item I care about. So there is a bit. So both of them, whoever sets that bit, gets access to that data item, let's say. Okay. The problem is, both of them try to execute the set bit operation at the same time. And it's not clear how, how you guarantee who succeeds. The CAS operation guarantees that only one of them will succeed. Okay. So if two of them simultaneously try to execute the CAS instruction, only one of them can succeed. And that's what, and that has to be guaranteed by the hardware. Okay. So the support for synchronized block in Java, other types of atomic blocks, they all require that instruction at the, at the heart of it. Okay. Some sort of a CAS. There is a couple of variations of it. CAS is the one I remember well, but there is other variations. Anyway, we got into a bit of a digression. So any questions on this? Yeah. So we talked about two separate protocols for, for, for, for, for, or two variations of protocols for, concurrency control. One was, we assumed that all the rights were actually public. Okay. So that's the kind of a situation where, with a locking based protocol. In a locking based protocol, when we had a right, that right was already public. It was already, in effect, the transaction directly had a private area. In effect, it directly worked in the buffer itself. Okay. So any right it did was visible to other transactions. Okay. So, we, which is a problem because now we have dirty rights and we need locks to make sure that no one else can, uh, uh, read it. So, for instance, T1 updated X directly here. Then T2 tried to read it. When T2 read it, when T2 will read a dirty value. Okay. Because transaction, let's assume the transaction T1 is not committed here. And the way we stop that in locking is we actually don't allow T2 to go ahead. Snapshot resolution doesn't do that. Snapshot resolution doesn't do that. Snapshot resolution requires you to make a copy and work on the copy. Only at the very end, when you are ready to commit and when you succeed, like your validation phase succeeds, at that point, you take this value that right now. Okay. Okay. But that last writing step still requires a lock. Okay. We didn't discuss this in lot of detail. But in, like, let's say T1 updated multiple values in snapshot resolution. Uh, there is a lot of links that you write down. It's going to be a lot of links that are connected, right? So, you can't do that. Not only, you can't do that. So, for instance, you can do that. You can do that. Okay. So, you can do this. Okay. So, that's the solution. So, this is the solution. So, this is what the solution is, let's say, we can do it. So, it's the solution. So, the solution is, we can do it. So, there's a solution. So, we can do it. Then it said, okay, I'm ready to commit. Did anyone conflict with me? The system sort of does its checks and says, nope, no one conflicted, you are good to go. At that point, T1 still needs to write two values here. No atomic operation for that. So you cannot write two values atomically. So you have to take a lock, a small lock, and then copy the light result. Because otherwise you again end up in a situation where between your copying of X and Y, something might happen. Questions? Yes. All right. So this is just sort of writing all of that, just discussing all of that in more detail. Transaction as a private area, read and write does the, does the, what do you call it, making the writes and reads global, and so on. Okay. So now, let's take a look at the data. Now comes the, the, the steel and the force issues, and sort of getting to one of the points that was made earlier. We'll define the terms first and then discuss the problems with it. Now, we have this situation here, right? So let's say that the updates are actually happening here. So we are not really, we are not really, we are not really, but we are updating here. Now, there is a possibility that the transaction one has updated X. It's still going on and it, it is not finished yet. But X is updated. At this point, the question is, can the buffer manager who is managing this limited space, is it allowed to take this and write it to disk? Okay. Can it take that updated value of X? Because remember, this is a page. And that page corresponds to a page of disk. So I have to copy that page back up at some point. The buffer manager might say, I am going to, I need space. I am going to take this and write it back. Okay. The buffer manager has its own policies for doing it. They are typically the least recently used policy. That's the most common LRU. LRU basically keeps track of when the pages were last used. And when the buffer needs more space, buffer manager needs space, it will take the page that is least recently used and copy it out. Okay. And so that you have empty space now for a new page to be brought in from disk. Okay. Now the challenge for us is that as the specification that we made was that transaction 1 had updated this value of X here. But transaction 1 is not finished yet. Then the buffer manager took it and wrote it to disk. Okay. Now we have a dirty value on disk. Okay. It's dirty because the transaction is not committed yet. But it's on disk. Okay. Now this, this whole area sort of, you have to reason it by saying, okay, what if a crash happens now? And so that's the question. Now what if a crash happens now? If a crash happens after that dirty value was written here, we are in a situation where the transaction did not finish, it's never gonna finish because the system crashed. And, but we have an update of that on disk. Okay. So we need to make sure that that update is ultimately reverted back. Okay. Because that update was incorrect. Right. That update, because STI was never finished, that update should have never made it to disk. Okay. So this is called STI. Okay. So STI means that the buffer manager is allowed to take any page it wants and write it back to disk, no matter whether it has dirty data or not. Okay. Make sense? Any questions on the definition of STI? No STI is the policy which basically says that buffer manager is not allowed to write back anything that has dirty data. And we don't, for performance reasons and there are other reasons, we can't have that. Okay. So no STI is not allowed. Any questions? Okay. So that's the STI part of it. The second part of it is force. Now let's say T1 updated both X and Y. Okay. Here. Okay. I committed. It's done. It printed out the receipt for the user. At this point the transaction is committed. But we actually haven't taken these values and returned them to disk. Okay. Now what if a crash happens? So T1 has committed but its changes were here. They were never here. The buffer manager did not get around to copying them out to the disk. So that's no force. Okay. So that's no force. Okay. So that's the first part of it. So the first part of it is, I committed. I committed. It's done. It printed out the receipt for the user. It printed out the receipt for the user. At this point the transaction is committed. But we actually haven't taken these values and returned them to disk. Okay. So T1 has committed but its changes were here. They were never here. The buffer manager did not get around to copying them out to the disk. So that's no force. Okay. So no force basically means we are not going to require for a transaction to commit. We are not going to require the changes to be returned to disk. Okay. So no force is the desirable from performance perspective. But the problem is, I now need to figure out what to do with those changes that were thrown, like that were essentially disappeared. Okay. Because they were not written here. The user has a receipt saying that the transaction was done. But the effect of the transaction is not there in my database. Okay. So that's the no force strategy. What was asked earlier was the force strategy. Before a transaction commits, we take all the items it wrote. And we write them to disk. Again, for performance reasons, we don't want that. Because that introduces too high latency for us. And we are not going to require that. So just more text details of it. Steal basically means the buffer manager can steal a page from database. The page might contain dirty rights. But we must allow steal for performance reasons. A database system forces all the updates to disk before committing. This is a problem because these are random IOs. And we will end up with high latencies. And we do no force. So no force is the one that we prefer. Okay. So you can draw a 2 by 2 matrix which are in database research. You might actually see this often. In the systems work especially you see this. If my policy is force and no steal, then the whole recovery becomes easy. Okay. In some ways. Because now it's not fully clear but still it becomes relatively easy. Because I am not allowing steal which means that no dirty rights on disk. I am requiring force which means that my transactions are committed always. Okay. It's not actually easy to implement it but at least if you were able to implement it, it makes the recovery part easy. What we want is the hardest part. Okay. We want the buffer manager to write whatever it wants, whenever it wants back to disk. And we never want to force it to write anything to disk. Or never is a strong word but we don't want updates to make it to the disk. Okay. So this is kind of what we just talked about. In the database uses deferred, the book uses the terminology called deferred database modification and immediate database modification but in the database systems literature, the steal and force terminology is much more common. So that's why I use that one. So for this part of the class, it would be better if you don't read the book. It might just confuse you. But if you do read it, just keep this in mind. Okay. Any questions so far? Now our solutions are going to be based on logging of various types. Okay. So let me sort of highlight the solution and then we'll continue with the more details in the next class. So pretty much, you know, for concurrency, we saw four different mechanisms. There is about 100 other papers out there on concurrency control on different schemes. Okay. For recovery, the primary mechanism is that of logging. Okay. There is effectively for last 30, 40 years, no one has really developed any other strategy for recovery purposes. Logging is the most common operation. A log is a record of everything the database system does. Right. You just write out like, it's like saying, oh, I updated A, I updated B, I updated C, I deleted A. Right. That's the log of it. You are actually still doing all the changes, but in addition to all the changes, we also keep track of the changes that were done. Okay. In most cases, these log records are stored in a different log disk. On your laptop when you run PostgreSQL, obviously you don't have a second disk on handy to keep log records. But in high performance operations, you are going to have a separate log disk. That doesn't interfere with your main disk. Okay. So, if you have a few disks, you have a separate one or multiple log disks to keep track of the log. Okay. Every operation, like the, when a transaction starts, we are going to add a T1 staff. When a transaction commits, we are going to add a T2 commit. When a transaction aborts, we are going to add a T2 abort. Okay. When a transaction updates a value, we will add a log record saying that transaction 1 updated A from 100 to 200. Okay. Now, I personally prefer in everything that I write to write it like this. 100 to 200. Because I get confused by this all the time. Like I don't know which is the older value, which is the newer value. And the literature seems to use both of those. Okay. So, in some literature, the 100 is the newer value, 200 is the older value. In some literature, 100 is the older value, 200 is the newer value. So, when I do it in, you know, in exams or anywhere, I always write it with an arrow. So, here we have a T1 commit. So, T1 commit. Okay. So, old value was 100, new value is 200. Okay. So, for instance, these are some of the log records that will get created by these two transactions. So, here T0 execute before T1. So, for T0, we have a start. Then we have A950, B2050. I'll explain that. Then T1, we have 600 and then T1 commit. Okay. So, T0 start, A, B commit, start, C commit. The book uses these log records, but these are not common. In this log record, you are only keeping the new value, not the old value. Okay. Or actually, you are only keeping the old value. I'm not sure which one of the two. Okay. So, it's only keeping track of whether the old value or the new value. Pretty sure it's the new value. Okay. So, I think it's keeping track of the new value. But the log records that you see more common include both the old value and the new value. There is an interesting question which these books don't answer is, how exactly am I identifying A? Okay. What is A? I can't just have A, right? It has to be an ID or something. So, you can think of it as a record ID or tuple ID. Okay. Some sort of an ID that uniquely identifies the record you are updating. So, if you have tuples, this could be a tuple ID. But that's not obvious. It's not very obvious what this is supposed to be. But it's some sort of identifier that identifies a specific record. So, even though this example does not have old value, just assume that there is always an old value. Okay. Any questions so far? So, our goal is going to be to use this log records to do solve all of the problems so far. If a transaction needs to be undone, I am going to use this log to undo it. By undone, I mean the transaction is partially finished. But for whatever reason, it's going to be cancelled or aborted. I will use this log records to reset the values to the old values. Okay. If a transaction is committed, but it's a system crashed at some point, so we're not quite sure what happened, we will use this log records to go forward and reapply the changes. Okay. And that is pretty much it. From an intuition perspective, that's all we're doing. Okay. There's a lot of detail beyond this, but that's the basic idea. We're going to use this log to undo things. That's why I need old values, right? That's why this is not enough. Only keeping new values is not enough because I need to keep track of the older values. And then if I need to sort of redo the effects of a transaction, I will sort of reapply them. So I either apply them from old to new or from new to old. Any questions? Okay. So let's pause here and we'll wrap up log base recovery and some of the other issues around it in the next class. So the plan right now would be we finish log base recovery in the next class and we finish distributed transactions. We'll start and finish distributed transaction in the next Thursday's class. There is a chance I'm actually not here in the last week of classes. So next Thursday's class might be the last class we have. Okay. Your semester is almost done. Two more weeks. Thanks. Alright. Let's stop here. We'll continue from this point in the next class. I'll leave until next class. Thank you.

